as a comedian , he entertained occasionally on ships in the black sea , where he came into contact with americans who described life in the united states to him that was when he first considered leaving the country yakov smirnoff interview , the comedy couch , 5 february 2007 after two years of attempting to leave , he came to the united states with his parents in 1977 , arriving in new york city after achieving some level of fame , smirnoff got his first break with a small role in the 1984 film moscow on the hudson ; on the set , he helped star robin williams with his russian dialogue image : yakof.jpg thumb right smirnoff at a hands across america promotional event in 1986 he had a starring role in the 1986–87 television sitcom what a country ! in that show , he played a russian cab driver studying for the u.s reagan and smirnoff immediately hit it off due to reagan 's love of jokes about life in the soviet union reagan enjoyed telling such jokes in speeches , and smirnoff became one of his sources for new material rohrabacher later stated that smirnoff became '' one of the inner circle '' of speechwriting advisers during reagan 's final years in office , due to the quality of smirnoff 's suggestions some of smirnoff 's jokes involved word play based on a limited understanding of american idioms and culture : '' i go to new york and i saw a big sign saying 'america loves smirnoff ' and i said to myself , what a country ! '' upon being offered work as a barman on a '' graveyard shift '' , he remarks , ' a bar in a cemetery ! what a country ! last call ? during happy hour the place must be dead what a country ! '' at the grocery store after finding '' new freedom '' maxi pads : '' freedom in a box ! what a country ! '' '' the first time i went to a restaurant , they asked me , 'how many in your party ? ' and i said , 'six hundred million ' '' in russia , we have russian express card : '' do n't leave home ! '' he once told johnny carson , '' i enjoy being in america : it 's fun , you know , because you have , you have so many things we never had in russia—like warning shots '' one exception was a 1985 miller lite commercial , in which smirnoff stated , '' in america , there is plenty of light beer and you can always find a party smirnoff is also a painter and has frequently featured the statue of liberty in his art since receiving his u.s on the night of the september 11 attacks , he started a painting inspired by his feelings about the event , based on an image of the statue of liberty 