, of all coupling constants , all elementary particle masses and all mixing angles of elementary particles ? is there a theory which explains why the gauge groups of the standard model are as they are , and why observed spacetime has 3 spatial dimensions and 1 temporal dimension ? are '' fundamental physical constants '' really fundamental or do they vary over time ? are any of the fundamental particles in the standard model of particle physics actually composite particles too tightly bound to observe as such at current experimental energies ? are there elementary particles that have not yet been observed , and , if so , which ones are they and what are their properties ? are there fifth force ? arrow of time ( e.g entropy ( arrow of time ) ) : why does time have a direction ? why did the universe have such low entropy in the past , and time correlates with the universal ( but not local ) increase in entropy , from the past and to the future , according to the second law of thermodynamics ? why are cp violations observed in certain weak force decays , but not elsewhere ? are cp violations somehow a product of the second law of thermodynamics , or are they a separate arrow of time ? are there exceptions to the principle of causality ? is there a single possible past ? is the present moment physically distinct from the past and future , or is it merely an emergent property of consciousness ? what links the quantum arrow of time to the thermodynamic arrow ? interpretation of quantum mechanics : how does the quantum description of reality , which includes elements such as the superposition of states and wavefunction collapse or quantum decoherence , give rise to the reality we perceive ? another way of stating this question regards the measurement problem : what constitutes a '' measurement '' which apparently causes the wave function to collapse into a definite state ? unlike classical physical processes , some quantum mechanical processes ( such as quantum teleportation arising from quantum entanglement ) can not be simultaneously '' local '' , '' causal '' , and '' real '' , but it is not obvious which of these properties must be sacrificed , or if an attempt to describe quantum mechanical processes in these senses is a category error such that a proper understanding of quantum mechanics would render the question meaningless can a multiverse resolve it ? yang–mills theory : given an arbitrary compact gauge group , does a non-trivial quantum yang–mills theory with a finite mass gap exist ? ( this problem is also listed as one of the millennium prize problems in mathematics problem of time : in quantum mechanics time is a classical background parameter and the flow of time is universal and absolute how can these two concepts of time be reconciled ? cosmic inflation : is the theory of cosmic inflation in the very early universe correct , and , if so , what are the details of this epoch ? what is the hypothetical scalar field that gave rise to this cosmic inflation ? if inflation happened at one point , is it chaotic inflation , and thus ongoing in some extremely distant place ? horizon problem : why is the distant universe so homogeneous when the big bang theory seems to predict larger measurable anisotropy of the night sky than those observed ? cosmological inflation is generally accepted as the solution , but are other possible explanations such as a variable speed of light more appropriate ? origin and future of the universe : big_bang pre–big_bang_cosmology is the universe heading towards a big freeze , a big rip , a big crunch , or a big bounce ? or is it part of an infinitely recurring cyclic model ? size of universe : the diameter of the observable universe is about 93 billion light-years , but what is the size of the whole universe ? baryon asymmetry : why is there far more matter than antimatter in the observable universe ? ( this may be solved due to the apparent asymmetry in neutrino-antineutrino oscillations ) cosmological constant problem : why does the zero-point energy of the vacuum not cause a large cosmological constant ? what cancels it out ? dark matter : what is the identity of dark matter ? is it a particle ? is it the lightest superpartner ( lsp ) ? or , do the galaxy rotation curve point not to some form of matter but actually to an extension of gravity ? dark energy : what is the cause of the observed accelerated expansion ( de sitter phase ) of the universe ? why is the energy density of the dark energy component of the same magnitude as the density of matter at present when the two evolve quite differently over time ; could it be simply that we are observing at exactly the right time ? is dark energy a pure cosmological constant or are models of quintessence such as phantom energy applicable ? dark flow : is a non-spherically symmetric gravitational pull from outside the observable universe responsible for some of the observed motion of large objects such as galactic clusters in the universe ? axis of evil : some large features of the microwave sky at distances of over 13 billion light years appear to be aligned with both the motion and orientation of the solar system vacuum catastrophe : why does the predicted mass of the vacuum state have little effect on the expansion of the universe ? quantum gravity : can quantum mechanics and general relativity be realized as a fully consistent theory ( perhaps as a quantum field theory ) ? is spacetime fundamentally continuous or discrete ? would a consistent theory involve a force mediated by a hypothetical graviton , or be a product of a discrete structure of spacetime itself ( as in loop quantum gravity ) ? are there deviations from the predictions of general relativity at very small or very large scales or in other extreme circumstances that flow from a quantum gravity mechanism ? black holes , black hole information paradox , and black hole radiation : do black holes produce thermal radiation , as expected on theoretical grounds ? does this radiation contain information about their inner structure , as suggested by gauge–gravity duality , or not , as implied by hawking 's original calculation ? if not , and black holes can evaporate away , what happens to the information stored in them ( since quantum mechanics does not provide for the destruction of information ) ? or does the radiation stop at some point leaving black hole remnants ? is there another way to probe their internal structure somehow , if such a structure even exists ? the cosmic censorship hypothesis and the chronology protection conjecture : can singularities not hidden behind an event horizon , known as '' naked singularities '' , arise from realistic initial conditions , or is it possible to prove some version of the '' cosmic censorship hypothesis '' of roger penrose which proposes that this is impossible ? similarly , will the closed timelike curves which arise in some solutions to the equations of general relativity ( and which imply the possibility of backwards time travel ) be ruled out by a theory of quantum gravity which unites general relativity with quantum mechanics , as suggested by the '' chronology protection conjecture '' of stephen hawking ? a series of researchers have suggested the existence of a fundamental particle with mass equal to or close to that of the planck mass neutron lifetime puzzle : while the neutron lifetime has been studied for decades , there currently exists a lack of consilience on its exact value , due to different results from two experimental methods ( '' bottle '' versus '' beam '' ) proton decay and spin crisis : is the proton fundamentally stable ? or does it decay with a finite lifetime as predicted by some extensions to the standard model ? how do the quarks and gluons carry the spin of protons ? supersymmetry : is spacetime supersymmetry realized at tev scale ? if so , what is the mechanism of supersymmetry breaking ? does supersymmetry stabilize the electroweak scale , preventing high quantum corrections ? does the lightest superpartner ( lsp ) comprise dark matter ? generations of matter : why are there three generations of quarks and leptons ? is there a theory that can explain the masses of particular quarks and leptons in particular generations from first principles ( a theory of yukawa couplings ) ? neutrino mass : what is the mass of neutrinos , whether they follow dirac or majorana statistics ? is the mass hierarchy normal or inverted ? is the cp violating phase equal to 0 ? strong cp problem and axions : why is the strong nuclear interaction invariant to parity and charge conjugation ? is peccei–quinn theory the solution to this problem ? could axions be the main component of dark matter ? anomalous magnetic dipole moment : why is the experimentally measured value of the muon 's anomalous magnetic dipole moment ( '' muon g−2 '' ) significantly different from the theoretically predicted value of that physical constant ? proton radius puzzle : what is the electric charge radius of the proton ? how does it differ from gluonic charge ? pentaquarks and other exotic hadrons : what combinations of quarks are possible ? why were pentaquarks so difficult to discover ? are they a tightly-bound system of five elementary particles , or a more weakly-bound pairing of a baryon and a meson ? mu problem : problem of supersymmetry theories , concerned with understanding the parameters of the theory solar cycle : how does the sun generate its periodically reversing large-scale magnetic field ? how do other solar-like stars generate their magnetic fields , and what are the similarities and differences between stellar activity cycles and that of the sun ? what caused the maunder minimum and other grand minima , and how does the solar cycle recover from a minima state ? coronal heating problem : why is the sun 's corona ( atmosphere layer ) so much hotter than the sun 's surface ? why is the magnetic reconnection effect many orders of magnitude faster than predicted by standard models ? astrophysical jet : why do only certain accretion discs surrounding certain astronomical objects emit relativistic jets along their polar axes ? solution ( 2019 ) why are there quasi-periodic oscillations in many accretion discs ? why does the period of these oscillations scale as the inverse of the mass of the central object ? why are there sometimes overtones , and why do these appear at different frequency ratios in different objects ? diffuse interstellar bands : what is responsible for the numerous interstellar absorption lines detected in astronomical spectra ? are they molecular in origin , and if so which molecules are responsible for them ? how do they form ? supermassive black holes : what is the origin of the m-sigma relation between supermassive black hole mass and galaxy velocity dispersion ? how did the most distant quasars grow their supermassive black holes up to 10 solar masses so early in the history of the universe ? kuiper cliff : why does the number of objects in the solar system 's kuiper belt fall off rapidly and unexpectedly beyond a radius of 50 astronomical units ? flyby anomaly : why is the observed energy of satellites gravity assist sometimes different by a minute amount from the value predicted by theory ? galaxy rotation problem : is dark matter responsible for differences in observed and theoretical speed of stars revolving around the centre of galaxies , or is it something else ? supernovae : what is the exact mechanism by which an implosion of a dying star becomes an explosion ? solution ( 2015 ) p-nuclei : what astrophysical process is responsible for the nucleogenesis of these rare isotopes ? ultra-high-energy cosmic ray : why is it that some cosmic rays appear to possess energies that are impossibly high , given that there are no sufficiently energetic cosmic ray sources near the earth ? why is it that ( apparently ) some cosmic rays emitted by distant sources have energies above the greisen–zatsepin–kuzmin limit ? rotation rate of saturn : why does the magnetosphere of saturn exhibit a ( slowly changing ) periodicity close to that at which the planet 's clouds rotate ? what is the true rotation rate of saturn 's deep interior ? origin of magnetar magnetic field : what is the origin of magnetar magnetic field ? large-scale anisotropy : is the universe at very large scales anisotropy , making the cosmological principle an invalid assumption ? the number count and intensity dipole anisotropy in radio , nrao vla sky survey ( nvss ) catalogue is inconsistent with the local motion as derived from cosmic microwave background and indicate an intrinsic dipole anisotropy quantum chromodynamics : what are the phases of strongly interacting matter , and what roles do they play in the evolution of cosmos ? what is the detailed partonic structure of the nucleons ? what does qcd predict for the properties of strongly interacting matter ? what determines the key features of qcd , and what is their relation to the nature of gravity and spacetime ? do glueballs exist ? do gluons acquire mass dynamically despite having a zero rest mass , within hadrons ? does qcd truly lack cp violations ? quark–gluon plasma : where is the onset of deconfinement : 1 ) as a function of temperature and chemical potentials ? 2 ) as a function of relativistic heavy-ion collision energy and system size ? what is the mechanism of energy and baryon number stopping leading to creation of quark-gluon plasma in relativistic heavy-ion collisions ? why is sudden hadronization and the statistical hadronization model a near-to-perfect description of hadron production from quark-gluon plasma ? is quark flavor conserved in quark-gluon plasma ? are strangeness and charm in chemical equilibrium in quark-gluon plasma ? does strangeness in quark-gluon plasma flow at the same speed as up and down quark flavours ? why does deconfined matter show qgp flow ? strangelet : does strange quark matter ( strangelet ) exist as stable state ? specific models of quark-gluon plasma formation : do gluon saturate when their occupation number is large ? do gluons form a dense system called color glass condensate ? what are the signatures and evidences for the balitsky–fadin–kuarev–lipatov , balitsky–kovchegov , catani–ciafaloni–fiorani–marchesini evolution equations ? nuclei and nuclear astrophysics : why is there a lack of convergence in estimates of the mean lifetime of a free neutron based on two separate—and increasingly precise—experimental methods ? what is the nature of the nuclear force that binds protons and neutrons into stable nuclei and rare isotopes ? what is the nature of exotic excitations in nuclei at the frontiers of stability and their role in stellar processes ? what is the nature of neutron stars and dense nuclear matter ? what is the origin of the elements in the cosmos ? what are the nuclear reactions that drive stars and stellar explosions ? what is the extended periodic table ? abraham–minkowski controversy : what is the momentum of light in optical media ? which ( abraham 's or minkowski 's ) momentum is right ? bose–einstein condensation : how do we rigorously prove the existence of bose–einstein condensates for general interacting systems ? gauge block wringing : what is the mechanism that allows gauge blocks to be wrung together ? scharnhorst effect : can light signals travel slightly faster than c between two closely spaced conducting plates , exploiting the casimir effect ? a more recent follow-up paper is under what conditions do navier–stokes existence and smoothness , which are the equations that describe the flow of an incompressible fluid ? this problem is also listed as one of the millennium prize problems in mathematics 