CEGEP

history . creation . cegeps network was created in 1967 under the responsibility of the first minister of education paul gérin-lajoie , the father of cegeps . the legislation was proposed following the parent report 's recommendation criticising the difficult and discriminatory access to higher education and the under-schooling of french canadians . before the reforme , 2-3 more years were necessary for french canadians to attain university than for english canadians . moreover , urban residents had far greater chance to receive post-secondary education than people living in rural area , at the time post-secondary education was divided into numerous parallel schools , such as nursing school , normal schools , classical colleges , etc . cegeps were henceforth created in order to harmonise the education system in quebec . one of the innovations of cegeps was the integration of pre-university and vocational programs within the same institution , which was merged from existing schools , and which would be implemented throughout the province . this transitory phase between high school and university , or between high school and the job market , also improves access to university or the job market . the first 12 cegeps opened in september 1967 are ( in alphabetical order ) : cegep of abitibi-témiscamingue collège ahuntsic cégep de chicoutimi cégep édouard-montpetit cégep de jonquière cégep limoilou collège lionel-groulx maisonneuve college cegep of outaouais cégep de rimouski cégep de sainte-foy valleyfield college . robillard reform . in 1993 , the robillard reform launched a revision or programmes of study defined by the ministry of education . these programmes were reevaluated according to the expectations of the industry . a committee evaluating college teachers was created . education path . students in quebec who intend to pursue higher education must attend a college ( i.e . , cegep ) before enrolling in a quebec university . students who follow a general studies program in quebec complete six years of primary school ( grades 1 through 6 ) , followed by five years of secondary school ( called grades 7 through 11 or secondary 1 to secondary 5 in english and 1 re secondaire au 5 e secondaire in french ) . quebec students complete one grade fewer in total than other north american students before beginning post-secondary studies , completing high school at grade 11 instead of grade 12 . cegep programs are typically two years in length with the exception of certain technical programs that are three years in length ; the latter programs are generally for those wishing to enter a vocational education . following successful completion of cegep , most in-province undergraduate programs are three years in length for quebec students ; hence , the total number of years of study for quebec students from primary school through a bachelor 's degree is the same as for other students in north america . for example , a quebec student who has completed a cegep diploma would begin a 3-year quebec-based university program in year 1 whereas an out-of-province student who has completed grade 12 would instead begin the same quebec-based university program in year 0 . contrarily , students who possess a cegep diploma may also generally attend out-of-province universities in which case diplomas are treated by universities in the same manner as the 2-year college diplomas ( associate degree ) or are awarded with one year of advanced standing . some advanced courses at the cegep level may be assessed as equivalent to introductory courses at university . for students intending on completing their post-secondary studies outside of quebec , there are three options . first , several quebec-based secondary schools have a specialized curriculum for students who wish to enter directly into out-of-province post-secondary programs . in these instances , students may take one year of courses at high schools that offer this option in order to fulfill the grade 12 requirements of the institution to which they are applying . second , students may complete one year of cegep courses prior to transferring to an out-of-province university so as to begin in the first year of an out-of-province post-secondary degree . for example , students wishing to attend an ontario university may complete one year of cegep and apply as a regular applicant who has completed grade 12 in ontario . third , students who have completed two years of cegep may apply for admission with one year of advanced standing to post-secondary institutions outside of quebec . programs . most , but not all colleges offer two types of programs : pre-university and technical . the pre-university programs take two years to complete , whereas the technical programs take three . these programs share a core curriculum , consisting of french , english , humanities , physical education and complementary courses ( elective courses unrelated to the program of study ) . pre-university program . a pre-university program is two years long . it covers both the subject matter that roughly corresponds to the additional year of high school common elsewhere in canada and the courses corresponding to those taken in first-year university in preparation for a chosen field in university ( sciences , humanities , commerce or arts ) . upon the completion of studies , the provincial government issues a diploma of college studies ( dcs ) , or dec . students are then prepared to complete certain undergraduate programs at a quebec university in 3 years , as opposed to 4 years outside quebec . students with a dec who choose to attend university in another province in canada or outside the country are eligible to either skip the first year and enter university as a second year student , or gain advanced standing or extra credit for their first year . the amount of extra credit accepted is at the discretion of each university . in practice , most universities do accept quebec college credits , but only up to one year , given the difference in structure of education systems between quebec and the rest of the provinces . technical program . quebec colleges also offer three-year technical programs for students who wish to pursue a skilled trade . unlike the pre-university programs , these are not preparation for university , although this does not prevent a student from attending a university afterwards . the technical programs also lead to a dec . examples of such technical programs are industrial electronics , architectural technology , nursing , building engineering technology , computer science , and theatre . though those programs can also lead to the university , they are geared towards immediate employment after completion . adult continuing education programs are also offered at colleges . many of those programs lead to a college certificate ( attestation of college studies ( acs ) , general and vocational colleges act , 18 ( c ) : attestation d'études collégiales—aec ) , which is similar to a dec but does not include the core curriculum . this certificate is delivered by a college 's continuing education department , while a diploma is issued by the ministry of education , recreation , and sport of quebec ( later renamed the ministry of education and higher education , in french ) . in addition , the majority of the province 's thirty-one '' technology transfer centres '' have been established by cegeps . at these centres , applied research is carried out in a specific field in cooperation with industrial partners . language . students can attend either a french-language or english-language cégep . see also . college ( quebec ) education in quebec list of colleges in quebec r score higher education in quebec centre de documentation collégiale sixth form college , a british institution that fulfills a similar purpose lycée , a similar french institution offering three years of instruction . references . - rss feed of cegep and community college jobs in canada . external links . list of cegeps ( portail du réseau collégial ) fédération des cégeps

cegep or ; ; also cégep , cegep or cégep is a publicly funded higher education pre‑university , collegiate technical college exclusive to the province of quebec education system . a loanword from french , it originates from the french acronym for , sometimes known in english as a '' general and vocational college '' , it is now considered a word in itself . although all colleges in quebec are colloquially referred to as cegeps , only public colleges are officially referred to by that name . both public ( cegeps ) and private colleges have the same function in quebec . although they may occasionally be compared to junior colleges or community colleges , cegeps differ in that a diploma of college studies ( or , dec ) is required for university admission in quebec , unless a student enters as a mature student , which typically means a minimum age of 21 , with other requirements . a student in quebec typically can not enter university with only a secondary diploma , unless the diploma was earned in another province or country . however , some private english schools in quebec offer grade 12 which do allow access to university without needing to earn a dec . why do some private schools offer grade 12 ? pre-university programs are typically two years in duration , filling the gap between secondary school and undergraduate degrees , which are both one year shorter in quebec relative to elsewhere in canada . technical programs are typically three years in duration , with specialization in courses leading to a career right after graduation . depending on the university , students with dec diplomas from a technical program can continue their studies at a university for higher education . the purpose of a separate collegiate education level is to make post-secondary education more accessible in quebec . it also ensures that students have a proper academic preparation to succeed at university . there are both public subsidized and private colleges , with the public cegeps having little or no tuition fee . a product of the quiet revolution , the cegep system was started in 1967 by the government of quebec and originally consisted of 12 cegeps . today , 48 cegeps operate in quebec , of which five are in the english language . there are also college centres , small public post-secondary education colleges very similar to cegeps , often secondary stand alone campuses of cégeps , like the centre d'études collégiales à chibougamau , part of the cégep de saint-félicien .