Ratite

loss of flight . loss of flight allows birds to eliminate the costs of maintaining various flight-enabling like high pectoral muscle mass , hollow bones and a light build , et cetera . the basal metabolic rate of flighted species is much higher than that of flightless terrestrial birds . but energetic efficiency can only help explain the loss of flight when the benefits of flying are not critical to survival . research on flightless rails indicates the flightless condition evolved in the absence of predators . this shows flight to be generally necessary for survival and dispersal in birds . in apparent contradiction to this , many landmasses occupied by ratites are also inhabited by predatory mammals . however , the k–pg extinction event created a window of time with large predators absent that may have allowed the ancestors of ratites to evolve flightlessness . they subsequently underwent selection for large size . one hypothesis suggests that as predation pressure decreases on islands with low raptor species richness and no mammalian predators , the need for large , powerful flight muscles that make for a quick escape decreases . moreover , raptor species tend to become generalist predators on islands with low species richness , as opposed to specializing in the predation of birds . an increase in leg size compensates for a reduction in wing length in insular birds that have not lost flight by providing a longer lever to increase force generated during the thrust that initiates takeoff . . description . ratites in general have many physical characteristics in common , which are often not shared by the family tinamidae , or tinamous . first , the breast muscles are underdeveloped . they do not have keeled sterna . their wishbones ( furculae ) are almost absent . they have a simplified wing skeletons and musculature . their legs are stronger and do not have air chambers , except the femurs . their tail and flight feathers have retrogressed or have become decorative plumes . they have no feather vanes , which means they do not need to oil their feathers , hence they have no preen glands . they have no separation of pterylae ( feathered areas ) and apteria ( non-feathered areas ) , for definitions of the two latin words and finally , they have palaeognathous palates . ostriches have the greatest dimorphism , rheas show some dichromatism during the breeding season . emus , cassowaries , and kiwis show some dimorphism , predominantly in size . while the ratites share a lot of similarities , they also have major differences . ostriches have only two toes , with one being much larger than the other . cassowaries have developed long inner toenails , used defensively . ostriches and rheas have prominent wings ; although they do n't use them to fly , they do use them in courtship and predator distraction . without exception , ratite chicks are capable of swimming and even diving . on an allometric basis , paleognaths have generally smaller brains than neognaths . kiwis are exceptions to this trend , and possess proportionally larger brains comparable to those of parrots and songbirds , though evidence for similar advanced cognitive skills is currently lacking . . gallery of living species . image : autruche thoiry 19801.jpg ostrich image : masai ostriches benh.jpg ostrich herd ( s . camelus massaicus ) image : rhea side profile.jpg american rhea image : darwin-nandus.jpg darwin 's rhea image : double-wattled cassowary.jpg southern cassowary file : casuarius unappendiculatus -northern cassowary -head to toe.jpg northern cassowary image : mooruk-wolf.jpg dwarf cassowary file : dromaius novaehollandiae qtl1.jpg emu image : apteryx haastii.jpg great spotted kiwi image : apteryx owenii 0.jpg little spotted kiwi image : kiwifugl.jpg north island brown kiwi . behavior and ecology . feeding and diet . ratite chicks tend to be more omnivorous or insectivorous ; similarities in adults end with feeding , as they all vary in diet and length of digestive tract , which is indicative of diet . ostriches , with the longest tracts at , are primarily herbivorous . rheas ' tracts are next longest at , and they also have caeca . they are also mainly herbivores , concentrating on broad-leafed plants . however , they will eat insects if the opportunity arises . emus have tracts of length , and have a more omnivorous diet , including insects and other small animals . cassowaries have next to the shortest tracts at . finally , kiwi have the shortest tracts and eat earthworms , insects , and other similar creatures . moas and elephant birds were the largest native herbivores in their faunas , far larger than contemporary herbivorous mammals in the latter 's case . some extinct ratites might have had odder lifestyles , such as the narrow-billed diogenornis and palaeotis , compared to the shorebird-like lithornithids , and could imply similar animalivorous diets . gerald mayr , paleogene fossil birds . reproduction . ratites are different from the flying birds in that they needed to adapt or evolve certain features to protect their young . first and foremost is the thickness of the shells of their eggs . their young are hatched more developed than most and they can run or walk soon thereafter . also , most ratites have communal nests , where they share the incubating duties with others . ostriches are the only ratites where the female incubates ; they share the duties , with the males incubating at night . cassowaries and emu are polyandrous , with males incubating eggs and rearing chicks with no obvious contribution from females . ostriches and rheas are polygynous with each male courting several females . male rheas are responsible for building nests and incubating while ostrich males incubate only at night . kiwis stand out as the exception with extended monogamous reproductive strategies where either the male alone or both sexes incubate a single egg . without exception , ratite chicks are capable of swimming and even diving . ratites and humans . ratites and humans have had a long relationship starting with the use of the egg for water containers , jewelry , or other art medium . male ostrich feathers were popular for hats during the 18th century , which led to hunting and sharp declines in populations . ostrich farming grew out of this need , and humans harvested feathers , hides , eggs , and meat from the ostrich . emu farming also became popular for similar reasons and for their emu oil . rhea feathers are popular for dusters , and eggs and meat are used for chicken and pet feed in south america . ratite hides are popular for leather products like shoes . . united states regulation . the usda 's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) began a voluntary , fee-for-service ratite inspection program in 1995 to help the fledgling industry improve the marketability of the meat . a provision in the fy2001 usda appropriations act ( p.l . 106-387 ) amended the poultry products inspection act to make federal inspection of ratite meat mandatory as of april 2001 ( 21 u.s.c . 451 et seq . ) .

by 2014 , a mitochondrial dna phylogeny including fossil members placed ostriches on the basal branch , followed by rheas , then a clade consisting of moas and tinamous , followed by the final two branches : a clade of emus plus cassowaries and one of elephant birds plus kiwis . vicariance based on the plate tectonic split-up of gondwana followed by continental drift would predict that the deepest phylogenetic split would be between african and all other ratites , followed by a split between south american and australo-pacific ratites , roughly as observed . however , the elephant bird–kiwi relation appears to require dispersal across oceans by flight , as apparently does the colonization of new zealand by the moa and possibly the back-dispersal of tinamous to south america , if the latter occurred . the phylogeny as a whole suggests not only multiple independent origins of flightlessness , but also of gigantism ( at least five times ) . gigantism in birds tends to be insular ; however , a ten-million-year-long window of opportunity for evolution of avian gigantism on continents may have existed following the cretaceous–paleogene extinction event , in which ratites were able to fill vacant herbivorous niches before mammals attained large size . some authorities , though , have been skeptical of the new findings and conclusions . kiwi and tinamous are the only palaeognath lineages not to evolve gigantism , perhaps because of competitive exclusion by giant ratites already present on new zealand and south america when they arrived or arose . the fact that new zealand has been the only land mass to recently support two major lineages of flightless ratites may reflect the absence of native mammals , which allowed kiwi to occupy a mammal-like nocturnal niche . however , various other landmasses such as south america and europe have supported multiple lineages of flightless ratites that evolved independently , undermining this competitive exclusion hypothesis . most recently , studies on genetic and morphological divergence and fossil distribution show that paleognaths as a whole probably had an origin in the northern hemisphere . early cenozoic northern hemisphere paleognaths such as lithornis , pseudocrypturus , paracathartes and palaeotis appear to be the most basal members of the clade . the various ratite lineages were probably descended from flying ancestors that independently colonised south america and africa from the north , probably initially in south america . from south america they could have traveled overland to australia via antarctica , ( by the same route marsupials are thought to have used to reach australia ) and then reached new zealand and madagascar via '' sweepstakes '' dispersals across the oceans . gigantism would have evolved subsequent to trans-oceanic dispersals .