Mormonism and polygamy

origin . many early converts to the religion including brigham young , journal history , 26 august 1857 ; cited by hyrum leslie andrus , doctrines of the kingdom ( salt lake city , utah : desert book co . , 1999 ) , 489n436 orson pratt , and lyman johnson , recorded that joseph smith was teaching plural marriage privately as early as 1831 or 1832 . pratt reported that smith told some early members in 1831 and 1832 that plural marriage was a true principle , but that the time to practice it had not yet come . orson pratt , '' celestial marriage , '' journal of discourses , reported by david w . evans ( 7 october 1869 ) , vol . 13 ( london : latter-day saint 's book depot , 1871 ) , 192–93 . johnson also claimed to have heard the doctrine from smith in 1831 . lyman johnson as recounted by orson pratt , '' report of elders orson pratt and joseph f . smith , '' millennial star , vol . 40 , no . 50 ( 16 december 1878 ) : 788 . mosiah hancock reported that his father was taught about plural marriage in the spring of 1832 . todd m . compton , in sacred loneliness : the plural wives of joseph smith ( salt lake city : signature books , 1997 ) , 644 ; citing mosiah hancock autobiography , 61–62 . the 1835 and 1844 versions of the church 's doctrine and covenants ( d & c ) prohibited polygamy and declared that monogamy was the only acceptable form of marriage : william clayton , smith 's scribe , recorded early polygamous marriages in 1843 : '' on the 1st day of may , 1843 , i officiated in the office of an elder by marrying lucy walker to the prophet joseph smith , at his own residence . during this period the prophet joseph took several other wives . amongst the number i well remember eliza partridge , emily partridge , sarah ann whitney , helen kimball and flora woodworth . these all , he acknowledged to me , were his lawful , wedded wives , according to the celestial order . his wife emma was cognizant of the fact of some , if not all , of these being his wives , and she generally treated them very kindly . '' as early as 1832 , mormon missionaries worked successfully to convert followers in maine of polygamist religious leader jacob cochran , who went into hiding in 1830 to escape imprisonment due to his practice of polygamy . among cochran 's marital innovations was '' spiritual wifery , '' and '' tradition assumes that he received frequent consignments of spiritual consorts , and that such were invariably the most robust and attractive women in the community . '' ridlon , g.t . cochran delusion/mormon invasion , in saco valley settlements and families : historical , biographical , genealogical , traditional , and legendary ( rutland , vermont : charles e . tuttle , 1895 ) , 269 ff . the majority of what became the quorum of the twelve in 1835 attended mormon conferences held in the center of the cochranites in 1834 and 1835 . evening and morning star 2 august 1834 : 181 . messenger and advocate 2 october 1835 : 204–07 states that '' on august 21 , 1835 , nine of the twelve met in conference at saco , maine . '' history of the reorganized church of jesus christ of latter day saints 1:583 . history of the church 2:252 brigham young , an apostle of the church , became acquainted with cochran 's followers as he made several missionary journeys through the cochranite territory from boston to saco , times and seasons 6 november 1 , 1845 . and later married augusta adams cobb , a former cochranite . stewart , j . j . ( 1961 ) brigham young and his wives , at p . 85 . carter , k.b . ( 1973 ) our pioneer heritage 6 , 187–89 . joseph smith publicly condemned polygamy , denied his involvement in it , and participants were excommunicated , as church records and publications reflect . '' notice , '' times and seasons , volume 5 , no . 3 , 1 february 1844 ( p . 423 in bound edition — alt source of text ) '' as we have lately been credibly informed , that an elder of the church of jesus christ , of latter-day saints , by the name of hiram brown , has been preaching polygamy , and other false and corrupt doctrines , in the county of lapeer , state of michigan . '' but church leaders nevertheless began practicing polygamy in the 1840s , particularly members of the quorum of the twelve . smith , w . '' a proclamation , '' warsaw signal , warsaw , illinois october 1845 , page 1 , column 4 sidney rigdon , while he was estranged from the church , wrote a letter in backlash to the messenger and advocate in 1844 condemning the church 's quorum of the twelve and their alleged connection to polygamy : on another occasion , he said '' you are sent out as shepherds to gather sheep together ; and remember that they are not your sheep . do not make selections before they are brought home and put into the fold . '' the first quote above is not attested in any mormon source , but first appeared in a derisive article in the new york times on may 15 , 1860 . hirshson 's cited source of the first quote is an april 17 , 1860 new york times article : fairmormon , an lds apologetics organization , considers the '' prettiest women '' statement to be apocryphal , but that it may be a paraphrase of kimball 's journal of discourses statement , which is authentic . in the paragraph immediately following the above quote , kimball said : the precise number who participated in plural marriage is not known , but studies indicate a maximum of 20 to 25 percent of latter-day saint adults were members of polygamist households . one third of the women of marriageable age and nearly all of the church leadership were involved in the practice . encyclopedia of mormonism . macmillan ( 1992 ) p . 1095 . . instances of coercion . critics of polygamy in the early lds church have documented several cases where deception and coercion were used to induce marriage , for example citing the case of joseph smith who warned some potential spouses of eternal damnation if they did not consent to be his wife . in 1893 , married lds church member john d . miles traveled to england and proposed to caroline owens , assuring her that he was not polygamous . she returned to utah and participated in a wedding , only to find out after the ceremony that miles was already married . she ran away , but miles hunted her down and raped her . she eventually escaped , and filed a lawsuit against miles that reached the supreme court and became a significant case in polygamy case law . ann eliza young , nineteenth wife of brigham young , claimed that young coerced her to marry him by threatening financial ruin of her brother . . incestuous plural marriages . critics of polygamy in the early lds church claim that polygamy was used to justify marriage of close relatives that would otherwise be considered immoral . in 1843 , joseph smith 's diary records the sealing of john milton bernhisel to his sister , maria , in a ceremony that included the sealing of bernhisel to multiple relatives , some of whom were deceased . however , this is understood by most scholars as the collective sealing or binding of the family and not a marriage between bernhisel and his sister . similar family sealings are practiced in latter-day saint temples today , where children of parents who were not sealed at the time of their marriage are sealed to their parents and to one another in a group ceremony . see also . criticism of the latter day saint movement the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints and politics in the united states marriage in the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints short creek raid sister wives . notes . references . . further reading . books . talbot , christine . a foreign kingdom : mormons and polygamy in american political culture , 1852-1890 . urbana , il : university of illinois press , 2013 . . journal articles . . other . & nbsp ; – provides a historical overview & nbsp ; – about the beginnings of plural marriage in the church & nbsp ; – about plural marriage in utah & nbsp ; – about the gradual ending of plural marriage . external links .

polygamy ( called plural marriage by mormons in the 19th century or the principle by modern fundamentalist practitioners of polygamy ) was practiced by leaders of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( lds church ) for more than half of the 19th century , and practiced publicly from 1852 to 1890 by between 20 and 30 percent of latter-day saint families . today , various denominations of fundamentalist mormonism continue to practice polygamy . the latter-day saints ' practice of polygamy has been controversial , both within western society and the lds church itself . the u.s . was both fascinated and horrified by the practice of polygamy , with the republican platform at one time referencing '' the twin relics of barbarism—polygamy and slavery . '' us history.org website the private practice of polygamy was instituted in the 1830s by founder joseph smith . the public practice of plural marriage by the church was announced and defended in 1852 by a member of the quorum of the twelve apostles , orson pratt , by the request of church president brigham young . for over 60 years , the lds church and the united states were at odds over the issue : the church defended the practice as a matter of religious freedom , while the federal government aggressively sought to eradicate it , consistent with prevailing public opinion . polygamy was probably a significant factor in the utah war of 1857 and 1858 , given republican attempts to paint democratic president james buchanan as weak in his opposition to both polygamy and slavery . in 1862 , the united states congress passed the morrill anti-bigamy act , which prohibited plural marriage in the territories . in spite of the law , mormons continued to practice polygamy , believing that it was protected by the first amendment . in 1879 , in reynolds v . united states , reynolds v . united states “ the history of the supreme court ” the supreme court of the united states upheld the morrill act , stating : '' laws are made for the government of actions , and while they can not interfere with mere religious belief and opinion , they may with practices . '' in 1890 , when it became clear that utah would not be admitted to the union while polygamy was still practiced , church president wilford woodruff issued a manifesto that officially terminated the practice of polygamy . although this manifesto did not dissolve existing plural marriages , relations with the united states markedly improved after 1890 , such that utah was admitted as a u.s . state in 1896 . after the manifesto , some mormons continued to enter into polygamous marriages , but these eventually stopped in 1904 when church president joseph f . smith disavowed polygamy before congress and issued a '' second manifesto , '' calling for all plural marriages in the church to cease , and established excommunication as the consequence for those who disobeyed . several small '' fundamentalist '' groups , seeking to continue the practice , split from the lds church , including the apostolic united brethren ( aub ) and the fundamentalist church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ( flds church ) . meanwhile , the lds church continues its policy of excommunicating members found practicing polygamy , and today actively seeks to distance itself from fundamentalist groups that continue the practice . the lds church encourages journalists not to use the word '' mormon '' in reference to organizations or people that practice polygamy ; the church repudiates polygamist groups and excommunicates their members if discovered ; on its web site , the church states that '' the standard doctrine of the church is monogamy '' and that polygamy was a temporary exception to the rule . citing jacob , chapter 2 , from the book of mormon : '' wherefore , my brethren , hear me , and hearken to the word of the lord : for there shall not any man among you have save it be one wife ; and concubines he shall have none . for if i will , saith the lord of hosts , raise up seed unto me , i will command my people ; otherwise they shall hearken unto these things . ''