Mohawk language

orthography . the mohawk alphabet consists of these letters : a e h i k n o r s t w y along with ʼ and ꞉ ( see modifier letter apostrophe and modifier letter colon ) . the orthography was standardized in 1993 . the standard allows for some variation of how the language is represented , and the clusters , , and are written as pronounced in each community . the orthography matches the phonological analysis as above except : the glottal stop is written with an apostrophe ʼ , it is often omitted at the end of words , especially in eastern dialect where it is typically not pronounced . is written ts in the eastern dialect ( reflecting pronunciation ) . seven is tsá꞉ta . is written tsi in the central dialect . seven is tsiá꞉ta . is written tsy in the western dialect . seven is tsyá꞉ta . is typically written i in the central and eastern dialects . six is ià꞉iaʼk . is usually written y in the western dialect . six is yà꞉yaʼk . the vowel is written en , as in one énska . the vowel is written on , as in eight shaʼté꞉kon . in cases where the vowel /e/ or /o/ is followed by an /n/ in the same syllable , the /n/ is written with an under-macron diacritic : keṉhó꞉tons ( i am closing a door ) . if the ṉ did not have the diacritic , the sequence would be pronounced . another convention is to write the nasal vowel with an ogonek , e.g . the low-macron accent is not a part of standard orthography and is n't used by the central or eastern dialects . in standard orthography , /h/ is written before /n/ to create the en or on : kehnhó꞉tons ' i am closing it ' . stress , length , and tone . stress , vowel length and tone are linked together in mohawk . there are three kinds of stressed vowels : short-high tone , long-high tone , and long-falling tone . stress is always written and occurs only once per word . short-high tone usually ( but not always ) appears in closed syllables or before /h/ . it is written with an acute accent : fruit káhi , road oháha . long-rising tone generally occurs in open syllables . it is written with a combination acute accent and colon : town kaná꞉ta , man rón꞉kwe . notice that when it is one of the nasal vowels which is long , the colon appears after the n . long-falling tone is the result of the word stress falling on a vowel which comes before a or + a consonant ( there may be , of course , exceptions to this and other rules ) . the underlying or reappears when stress is placed elsewhere . it is written with a grave accent and colon : stomach onekwèn꞉ta ( from . the central ( ahkwesáhsne ) dialect has the following consonant clusters : . education . six nations polytechnic in ohsweken , ontario , offers ogwehoweh language diploma and degree programs in mohawk or cayuga . starting in september 2017 , the university of waterloo in waterloo , ontario will offer a credit course in mohawk ; the classes are to be given at renison university college in collaboration with the waterloo aboriginal education centre , st . paul 's university college . resources are available for self-study of mohawk by a person with no or limited access to native speakers of mohawk . here is a collection of some resources currently available : talk mohawk , an iphone app and android app , includes words , phrases , and the thanksgiving address from monica peters rosetta stone levels 1 and 2 ( cd-rom ) edited by frank and carolee jacobs and produced by the kanienʼkehá꞉ka onkwawén꞉na raotitióhkwa language and cultural center at kahnawà꞉ke ( secondary/high school level ) a collection of 33 vocabulary lessons provided by the mohawk language custodian association . lesson collection at kanehsatakevoices.com david kanatawakhon maracle , kanyenʼkeha tewatati ( let 's speak mohawk ) , ( book and 3 companion tapes are available from audio forum ) ( high school/college level ) nancy bonvillain , a grammar of akwesasne mohawk ( professional level ) nancy bonvillain and beatrice francis , mohawk–english , english–mohawk dictionary , 1971 , university of the state of new york in albany ( word lists , by category ) chris w . harvey , sathahitáhkhe ' kanienʼkéha ( introductory level mohawk language textbook , eastern dialect ) , ( high school/college level ) josephine s . horne , kanienʼkéha iakorihonnién꞉nis ( book and 5 companion cds are available from kahnawà꞉ke cultural center ) ( secondary/high school level ) nora deering & helga harries delisle , mohawk : a teaching grammar ( book and 6 companion tapes are available from kahnawà꞉ke cultural center ) ( high school/college level ) on october 8 , 2013 , '' daryl kramp , member of parliament ( prince edward-hastings ) , on behalf of the honourable shelly glover , minister of canadian heritage and official languages , today announced support for the tsi kionhnheht ne onkwawenna language circle ( tknolc ) to develop mohawk language-learning tools . '' tom porter and dorothy lazore , nobody can do it better than wariso꞉se : language guide and dictionary firstvoices , a free online learning tool , includes videos , text entries , pictures , games , an iphone app and android app to facilitate language learning , teaching and revitalization . speak mohawk , an app that can be downloaded from itunes or google play , facilitates language by teaching words and phrases . keyboards . there are software packages available for both the microsoft windows and mac operating systems to enable typing of the mohawk language electronically . both packages are available through firstvoices , a web-based project to support aboriginal peoples ' teaching and archiving of language and culture . . see also . iroquoian languages oneida language seneca language . references . further reading . hoover , m . l . ( 1992 ) . '' the revival of the mohawk language in kahnawake '' . canadian journal of native studies , 12 ( 2 ) , 269-287 . mcalpine , l . , eriks-brophy , a . , & crago , m . ( 1996 ) . '' teaching beliefs in mohawk classrooms : issues of language and culture '' . anthropology & education quarterly , ( 3 ) . 390 . julian , c . ( 2011 ) . a history of the iroquoian languages ( unpublished doctoral dissertation ) . university of manitoba , winnipeg . maracle , b . j . ( 2002 ) . '' adult mohawk language immersion programming '' . mcgill journal of education , 37 ( 3 ) , 387 . deering , n . , & harries-delisle , h . ( 1976 ) . mohawk . a teaching grammar . preliminary version . michelson , g . ( 1973 ) . a thousand words of mohawk , ( no . 5 ) , national museum of man . external links . mohawk language api for developers of software , websites , mobile apps , video games ( ar , vr and mixed reality ) . mohawk language profile , the endangered languages project kanienkeha.net , '' mohawk dictionary '' endangered language initiative . kanehsatake voices , online lessons , bilingual mohawk course in english and french talkmohawk.com , mohawk language mobile apps mohawk - english dictionary , websters online dictionary mohawk language , alphabet and pronunciation , omniglot marianne mithun , conseil supérieur de la langue française , quebec list of mohawk language resources mohawk language texts , from the boston athenæum : schoolcraft collection of books in native american languages . digital collection .

mohawk grammar allows for whole propositions to be expressed by one word , which we classify as a verb . the other core elements ( subjects , objects , etc . ) can be incorporated into the verb . well-formed verb phrases contain at the bare minimum a verb root and a pronominal prefix . the rest of the elements are not necessary . tense , aspect and modality are expressed via suffixes on the verb phrase as well . some examples : 12 ) katorats '' i hunt '' k-atorat-s i-hunt-habitual asp this is composed of three parts ; the pronominal prefix , the verb root and a suffix which marks aspect . mohawk seems to prefer aspect markers to tense to express grammaticalisation in time . 13 ) nyaʼtsvshayayaʼkeʼ '' …where he will cross over again from here to there… '' n-yaʼ-t-v-s-ha-yahyaʼk-eʼ partitive-translocative-dualic-future-iterative-noun-verb root-suffix '' where over here to there will again he cross . '' this example shows multiple prefixes that can be affixed to the verb root , but certain affixes are forbidden from coexisting together . for example , the aorist and the future tense affix will not be found on the same well-formed sentence . 14 ) vsenataraʼ '' you will make a visit '' v-se-natahr-aʼ future tense+ nominative pronoun + verb root + momentary asp suffix 15 ) asenataraʼ '' you should make a visit '' a-se-natahr-aʼ conditional mood prefix + nominative pronoun + verb root + momentary suffix 16 ) sanatahruneʼ '' you were visiting '' sa-natahr-u-hneʼ accusative pronoun + verb root + stative suffix + momentary suffix here , different prefixes and suffixes are used that mark tense , aspect and modality . most grammatical relations in mohawk are expressed through various different affixes onto a verb . subjects , objects , and relationships between subjects and objects are given their own affixes . in mohawk , each transitive relationship between subjects and objects are given their own prefix . for example : 17 ) a : ku-noruhkwa i-you + love '' i love you '' b : ri-noruhkwa i-him + love '' i love him '' c : ke-noruhkwa i-it/her + love '' i love it/her '' each of these affixes are denoting a transitive relationship between two things . there are more affixes for denoting transitive relationships like '' we-they '' , they-us ( inclusive/exclusive ) , etc . noun incorporation one of the features of mohawk called noun incorporation allows a verb to absorb a noun into it . when incorporation happens , an epenthetic a can appear between the noun root and the verb root . for example : 18 ) owiraʼa wahrakeʼ ne oʼwahru baby ate the meat with noun incorporation : 19 ) owiraʼa wahaʼwahrakeʼ baby meat-ate 20 ) waʼeksohareʼ '' she dish-washed '' ks dish , ohare wash 21 ) waʼkenaktahninuʼ '' i bed-bought '' nakt bed + a ( increment ) + hninu buy 22 ) wahanaʼtarakwetareʼ '' he bread-cut '' naʼtar bread + a ( increment ) + kwetar cut most of these examples take the epenthetic vowel a ; it can be omitted if the incorporated noun does n't give rise a complex consonant cluster in the middle of the word .