Glycogen

structure . glycogen is a branched biopolymer consisting of linear chains of glucose residues with an average chain length of approximately 8–12 glucose units and 2,000-60,000 & nbsp ; residues per one molecule of glycogen glucose units are linked together linearly by α ( 1→4 ) glycosidic bonds from one glucose to the next . branches are linked to the chains from which they are branching off by α ( 1→6 ) glycosidic bonds between the first glucose of the new branch and a glucose on the stem chain . due to the way glycogen is synthesised , every glycogen granule has at its core a glycogenin protein . glycogen is in muscle , liver , and fat cells is stored in a hydrated form , composed of three or four parts of water per part of glycogen associated with 0.45 & nbsp ; millimoles ( 18 & nbsp ; mg ) of potassium per gram of glycogen . glucose is an osmotic molecule , and can have profound effects on osmotic pressure in high concentrations possibly leading to cell damage or death if stored in the cell without being modified . glycogen is a non-osmotic molecule , so it can be used as a solution to storing glucose in the cell without disrupting osmotic pressure . . functions . liver . as a meal containing carbohydrates or protein is eaten and digested , blood glucose levels rise , and the pancreas secretes insulin . blood glucose from the portal vein enters liver cells ( hepatocytes ) . insulin acts on the hepatocytes to stimulate the action of several enzymes , including glycogen synthase . glucose molecules are added to the chains of glycogen as long as both insulin and glucose remain plentiful . in this postprandial or '' fed '' state , the liver takes in more glucose from the blood than it releases . after a meal has been digested and glucose levels begin to fall , insulin secretion is reduced , and glycogen synthesis stops . when it is needed for energy , glycogen is broken down and converted again to glucose . glycogen phosphorylase is the primary enzyme of glycogen breakdown . for the next 8–12 hours , glucose derived from liver glycogen is the primary source of blood glucose used by the rest of the body for fuel . glucagon , another hormone produced by the pancreas , in many respects serves as a countersignal to insulin . in response to insulin levels being below normal ( when blood levels of glucose begin to fall below the normal range ) , glucagon is secreted in increasing amounts and stimulates both glycogenolysis ( the breakdown of glycogen ) and gluconeogenesis ( the production of glucose from other sources ) . muscle . muscle cell glycogen appears to function as an immediate reserve source of available glucose for muscle cells . other cells that contain small amounts use it locally , as well . as muscle cells lack glucose-6-phosphatase , which is required to pass glucose into the blood , the glycogen they store is available solely for internal use and is not shared with other cells . this is in contrast to liver cells , which , on demand , readily do break down their stored glycogen into glucose and send it through the blood stream as fuel for other organs . . history . glycogen was discovered by claude bernard . his experiments showed that the liver contained a substance that could give rise to reducing sugar by the action of a '' ferment '' in the liver . by 1857 , he described the isolation of a substance he called '' la matière glycogène '' , or '' sugar-forming substance '' . soon after the discovery of glycogen in the liver , a . & nbsp ; sanson found that muscular tissue also contains glycogen . the empirical formula for glycogen of n was established by kekulé in 1858 . . metabolism . synthesis . glycogen synthesis is , unlike its breakdown , endergonic—it requires the input of energy . energy for glycogen synthesis comes from uridine triphosphate ( utp ) , which reacts with glucose-1-phosphate , forming udp-glucose , in a reaction catalysed by utp—glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase . glycogen is synthesized from monomers of udp-glucose initially by the protein glycogenin , which has two tyrosine anchors for the reducing end of glycogen , since glycogenin is a homodimer . after about eight glucose molecules have been added to a tyrosine residue , the enzyme glycogen synthase progressively lengthens the glycogen chain using udp-glucose , adding α ( 1→4 ) -bonded glucose to the reducing end of the glycogen chain . the glycogen branching enzyme catalyzes the transfer of a terminal fragment of six or seven glucose residues from a nonreducing end to the c-6 & nbsp ; hydroxyl group of a glucose residue deeper into the interior of the glycogen molecule . the branching enzyme can act upon only a branch having at least 11 & nbsp ; residues , and the enzyme may transfer to the same glucose chain or adjacent glucose chains . breakdown . glycogen is cleaved from the nonreducing ends of the chain by the enzyme glycogen phosphorylase to produce monomers of glucose-1 & nbsp ; phosphate : in vivo , phosphorolysis proceeds in the direction of glycogen breakdown because the ratio of phosphate and glucose-1-phosphate is usually greater than 100 . glucose-1 & nbsp ; phosphate is then converted to g6p by phosphoglucomutase . a special debranching enzyme is needed to remove the α ( 1-6 ) & nbsp ; branches in branched glycogen and reshape the chain into a linear polymer . the g6p & nbsp ; monomers produced have three possible fates : g6p can continue on the glycolysis pathway and be used as fuel . g6p can enter the pentose phosphate pathway via the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase to produce nadph and 5 & nbsp ; carbon sugars . in the liver and kidney , g6p can be dephosphorylated back to glucose by the enzyme glucose 6-phosphatase . this is the final step in the gluconeogenesis pathway . clinical relevance . disorders of glycogen metabolism . the most common disease in which glycogen metabolism becomes abnormal is diabetes , in which , because of abnormal amounts of insulin , liver glycogen can be abnormally accumulated or depleted . restoration of normal glucose metabolism usually normalizes glycogen metabolism , as well . in hypoglycemia caused by excessive insulin , liver glycogen levels are high , but the high insulin levels prevent the glycogenolysis necessary to maintain normal blood sugar levels . glucagon is a common treatment for this type of hypoglycemia . various inborn errors of metabolism are caused by deficiencies of enzymes necessary for glycogen synthesis or breakdown . these are collectively referred to as glycogen storage diseases . glycogen depletion and endurance exercise . long-distance athletes , such as marathon runners , cross-country skiing , and cyclists , often experience glycogen depletion , where almost all of the athlete 's glycogen stores are depleted after long periods of exertion without sufficient carbohydrate consumption . this phenomenon is referred to as '' hitting the wall '' . glycogen depletion can be forestalled in three possible ways : first , during exercise , carbohydrates with the highest possible rate of conversion to blood glucose ( high glycemic index ) are ingested continuously . the best possible outcome of this strategy replaces about 35 % of glucose consumed at heart rates above about 80 % of maximum . second , through endurance training adaptations and specialized regimens ( e.g . fasting , low-intensity endurance training ) , the body can condition type & nbsp ; i muscle fibers to improve both fuel use efficiency and workload capacity to increase the percentage of fatty acids used as fuel , sparing carbohydrate use from all sources . third , by consuming large quantities of carbohydrates after depleting glycogen stores as a result of exercise or diet , the body can increase storage capacity of intramuscular glycogen stores . this process is known as carbohydrate loading . in general , glycemic index of carbohydrate source does not matter since muscular insulin sensitivity is increased as a result of temporary glycogen depletion . when experiencing glycogen debt , athletes often experience extreme fatigue to the point that it is difficult to move . as a reference , the very best professional cyclists in the world will usually finish a 4–5 stage race right at the limit of glycogen depletion using the first three strategies . when athletes ingest both carbohydrate and caffeine following exhaustive exercise , their glycogen stores tend to be replenished more rapidly ; however , the minimum dose of caffeine at which there is a clinically significant effect on glycogen repletion has not been established .

glycogen is a multibranched polysaccharide of glucose that serves as a form of energy storage in animals , fungi , and bacteria . the polysaccharide structure represents the main storage form of glucose in the body . glycogen functions as one of two forms of energy reserves , glycogen being for short-term and the other form being triglyceride stores in adipose tissue ( i.e . , body fat ) for long-term storage . in humans , glycogen is made and stored primarily in the cells of the liver and skeletal muscle . in the liver , glycogen can make up 5–6 % of the organ 's fresh weight , and the liver of an adult , weighing 1.5 & nbsp ; kg , can store roughly 100–120 & nbsp ; grams of glycogen . in skeletal muscle , glycogen is found in a low concentration ( 1–2 % of the muscle mass ) and the skeletal muscle of an adult weighing 70 & nbsp ; kg stores roughly 400 & nbsp ; grams of glycogen . the amount of glycogen stored in the body—particularly within the muscles and liver—mostly depends on physical training , basal metabolic rate , and eating habits . small amounts of glycogen are also found in other tissues and cells , including the kidneys , red blood cells , white blood cells , and glial cells in the brain . the uterus also stores glycogen during pregnancy to nourish the embryo . approximately 4 & nbsp ; grams of glucose are present in the blood of humans at all times ; in fasting individuals , blood glucose is maintained constant at this level at the expense of glycogen stores in the liver and skeletal muscle . glycogen stores in skeletal muscle serve as a form of energy storage for the muscle itself ; however , the breakdown of muscle glycogen impedes muscle glucose uptake from the blood , thereby increasing the amount of blood glucose available for use in other tissues . liver glycogen stores serve as a store of glucose for use throughout the body , particularly the central nervous system . the human brain consumes approximately 60 % of blood glucose in fasted , sedentary individuals . glycogen is the analogue of starch , a glucose polymer that functions as energy storage in plants . it has a structure similar to amylopectin ( a component of starch ) , but is more extensively branched and compact than starch . both are white powders in their dry state . glycogen is found in the form of granules in the cytosol/cytoplasm in many cell types , and plays an important role in the glucose cycle . glycogen forms an energy reserve that can be quickly mobilized to meet a sudden need for glucose , but one that is less compact than the energy reserves of triglycerides ( lipids ) . as such it is also found as storage reserve in many parasitic protozoa .