Order of Canada

possession and sale . the constitution of the order of canada states that the insignia remain property of the crown , and requires any member of the order to return to the chancellery their original emblem should they be upgraded within the order to a higher rank . thus , while badges may be passed down as family heirlooms , or loaned or donated for display in museums , they can not be sold by any individual other than the monarch with the proper advice and consent of her ministers . over the decades , however , a number of order of canada insignia have been put up for sale . the first was the companion 's badge of m . & nbsp ; j . coldwell , who was appointed in 1967 ; his badge was sold at auction in 1981 , an act that received criticism from government officials . in 2007 , it was revealed that one of the first ever issued insignia of the order of canada , a medal of service awarded originally to quebec historian gustave lanctot , was put up for sale via e-mail . originally , the anonymous auctioneer , who had purchased the decoration for 45 at an estate sale in montreal , attempted to sell the insignia on ebay ; however , after the bidding reached 15,000 , ebay removed the item , citing its policy against the sale of government property , including '' any die , seal or stamp provided by , belonging to , or used by a government department , diplomatic or military authority appointed by or acting under the authority of her majesty . '' rideau hall stated that selling medals was '' highly discouraged '' ; however , the owner continued efforts to sell the insignia via the internet . five years later , a miniature insignia presented to tommy douglas was put on auction in ontario as part of a larger collection of douglas artifacts . douglas 's daughter , shirley douglas , purchased the set for 20,000 . . eligibility and appointment . any of the three levels of the order of canada are open to all living canadian citizens , except all federal and provincial politicians and judges while they hold office . the order recognizes the achievement of outstanding merit or distinguished service by canadians who made a major difference to canada through lifelong contributions in every field of endeavour , as well as the efforts made by non-canadians who have made the world better by their actions . membership is thus accorded to those who exemplify the order 's latin motto , taken from of the bible , desiderantes meliorem patriam , meaning '' they desire a better country . '' each of the six to eight hundred nominations submitted each year , by any person or organization , is received by the order 's advisory council , which , along with the governor general , makes the final choice of new inductees , typically by consensus rather than a vote ; a process that , when conceived , was the first of its kind in the world . appointees are then accepted into the organization at an investiture ceremony typically conducted by the governor general at rideau hall , although the queen or a provincial viceroy may perform the task , and the ceremony may take place in other locations . since the 1991 investiture of ted rogers , order of canada instalment ceremonies have been broadcast on various television channels and the internet ; recipients are given a complimentary video recording of their investiture ceremony from rogers cable . at certain periods , holders of the order were presented with other awards , usually commemorative medals . thus far , two commemoratives have been given automatically to every living member of the order of canada : the queen elizabeth ii silver jubilee medal in 1977 and the queen elizabeth ii diamond jubilee medal in 2012 . . advisory council . the task of the order 's advisory council is to evaluate the nominations of potential inductees , decide if the candidates are worthy enough to be accepted into the order , and make recommendations to the governor general , who appoints the new members . the council is chaired by the chief justice of canada , and includes the clerk of the queen 's privy council , the deputy minister of canadian heritage , the chair of the canada council for the arts , the president of the royal society of canada , the chair of the association of universities and colleges of canada , and five members of the order who sit on the council for a three-year period . if a nomination involves a non-canadian citizen , the deputy minister of foreign affairs is invited by the advisory council to offer evaluation . decisions of the council and new appointments to and dismissals from the order of canada are announced through the canada gazette . , the members of the advisory council are : richard wagner , chief justice of canada ( chair ) edith clouter sophie d'amours , universities canada chair jeremy nichol mcneil , royal society of canada president minnie grey patrick jarvis jesse wente , canada council chair hélène laurendeau , deputy minister of canadian heritage patrick mcgrath barbara sherwood lollar ian shugart , clerk of the queen 's privy council and secretary to the cabinet . refusal . few have declined entry into the order of canada ; , 1.5 per cent of offered appointments to the order had been refused . the identities of those individuals who have declined induction since the 1970s are kept confidential , so the full list is not publicly known . some , however , have spoken openly about their decisions , including robert weaver , who stated that he was critical of the '' three-tier '' nature of the order ; claude ryan and morley callaghan , who both declined the honour in 1967 ; mordecai richler , who twice declined ; and marcel dubé , roger lemelin and glenn gould , who all declined in 1970 . however , all the above individuals , save for gould and weaver , later did accept appointment into the order . others have rejected appointment on the basis of being supporters of the quebec sovereignty movement , such as luc-andré godbout , rina lasnier and geneviève bujold , while alice parizeau , another supporter of quebec sovereignty , was criticized for accepting entry into the order despite her beliefs . victoria cross recipient cecil meritt cited the fact that he already held canada 's highest decoration as a reason not to be admitted to the order of canada . prince philip , duke of edinburgh , was in 1982 offered appointment to the order as an honorary companion ; however , he refused on the grounds that , as the consort of the queen , he was a canadian and thus entitled to a substantive appointment . in 1993 , the advisory council proposed an amendment to the constitution of the order of canada , making the sovereign 's spouse automatically a companion , but prince philip again refused , stating that if he was to be appointed , it should be on his merits . congruent with these arguments , he in 1988 accepted without issue a substantive induction as a companion of the order of australia . in 2013 , the constitution of the order of canada was amended in a way that permitted the substantive appointment of royal family members and prince philip accepted induction as the first extraordinary companion of the order of canada on 26 april 2013 . former premier of newfoundland joseph smallwood declined appointment as a companion because he felt that , as a self-proclaimed father of confederation , he deserved a knighthood . smallwood was never knighted and later accepted induction as a companion . . resignation and removal . resignations from the order can take place only through the prescribed channels , which include the member submitting to the secretary general of the order of canada a letter notifying the chancellery of his or her desire to terminate their membership , and only with the governor general 's approval can the resignation take effect . on 1 june 2009 , the governor general accepted the resignations of astronomer and inventor rené racine , pianist jacqueline richard , and cardinal jean-claude turcotte ; on 11 january 2010 , did the same for renato giuseppe bosisio , an engineering professor , and father lucien larré ; and on 19 april 2010 for frank chauvin . it was also reported that other constituents of the order of canada had , in reaction to henry morgentaler 's induction into their ranks , indicated that they would return or had returned their emblems in protest , including organizations such as the missionary oblates of mary immaculate and madonna house apostolate doing so on behalf of deceased former members . members may be removed from the order if the advisory council feels their actions have brought the society into disrepute . in order for this to be done , the council must agree to take action and then send a letter to the person both telling of the group 's decision and requesting a response . anyone removed from the order is required to return their insignia . , seven people have been removed from the order of canada : alan eagleson , who was dismissed after being jailed for fraud in 1998 ; david ahenakew , who faced calls for his removal due to antisemitic comments he made in 2002 ; t . sher singh , after the law society of upper canada found him guilty of professional misconduct and revoked his licence to practise law ; steve fonyo , due to '' his multiple criminal convictions , for which there are no outstanding appeals '' ; garth drabinsky , who was found guilty of fraud and forgery in ontario and has been a fugitive from american law for related crimes ; conrad black , who was convicted in the united states in 2007 of fraud and obstruction of justice ; and ranjit chandra , whose scientific work was discredited by allegations of fraud . in 2013 , norman barwin resigned from the order as a result of the advisory council moving forward with his pending removal due to his being found guilty of professional misconduct . . controversial appointments . the advisory board attempts to remain apolitical and pragmatic in its approach to selecting new members of the order of canada , generally operating without input from minister of the crown ; political interference has occurred only once , when in 1978 paul desmarais 's investiture was delayed for six months by prime minister pierre trudeau . however , some of the committee 's selections have caused controversy . for instance , the admission in 2001 of sex educator sue johanson , host of the long-running sunday night sex show , as a member stirred controversy among some of canada 's christian organizations , as johanson had taught teenagers methods of safe sex alongside abstinence . similarly , the acceptance of birth control advocate elizabeth bagshaw and gay rights campaigner brent hawkes also incited debate . pro-choice activist henry morgentaler 's appointment to the order on 1 july 2008 not only marked the first time the advisory council had not been unanimous in its decision , but also proved to be one of the most controversial appointments in the order 's history . opponents organized protests outside of rideau hall on 9 july , while compatriots did the same in front of government house in st . john 's , newfoundland and labrador , the official residence of that province 's lieutenant governor . one former police detective , frank chauvin , along with a catholic anti-abortion activist , filed suit against the order of canada advisory council , demanding that the minutes of the meeting relating to morgentaler be made public . the appointment of morgentaler prompted former liberal member of parliament clifford lincoln to write that the workings of the advisory council were '' mysterious '' , citing what he theorized to be inbuilt partiality and conflict of interest as reasons why margaret somerville , whom lincoln had twice nominated to the advisory council , was turned down for appointment , yet morgentaler was accepted . journalist henry aubin in the montreal gazette opined that the council 's rejection of somerville , her personal opposition to same-sex marriage , and the acceptance of brent hawkes , jane rule , and jean chrétien , all regarded as supporting same-sex unions , as well as the appointment of a controversial figure such as morgentaler , were all signs that the advisory council operated with partisan bias . aubin also pointed to the presence on the council of members of the royal society of canada , an organization into which somerville was received . . proposed amendments . at a 2006 conference on commonwealth honours , christopher mccreery , an expert on canada 's honours , raised the concern that the three grades of the order of canada were insufficient to recognize the nation 's very best ; one suggestion was to add two more levels to the order , equivalent to knighthoods in british orders . the order of precedence also came under scrutiny , particularly the anomaly that all three grades of the order of canada supersede the top levels of each of the other orders ( except the order of merit ) , contrary to international practice . in june 2010 , mccreery suggested reforms to the order of canada that would avert the awkwardness around appointing members of the canadian royal family as full members of the order : he theorized that the queen , as the order 's sovereign , could simply appoint , on ministerial advice , anyone as an extra member , or the monarch could issue an ordinance allowing for her relations to be made regular members when approved . similarly , mccreery proposed that a new division of the order could be established specifically for governors general , their spouses , and members of the royal family , a version of which was adopted in 2013 . . see also . list of companions of the order of canada . notes . references . citations . . further reading . . external links . governor general 's order of canada site canadian medals chart : orders , decorations and medals order of canada 50th anniversary history website

upon admission into the order of canada , members are given various insignia of the organization , all designed by bruce w . beatty , who '' broke new ground in the design of insignia of orders within the queen 's realms '' and was himself made a member of the order in 1990 ; beatty attended every investiture ceremony between 1967 and early 2010 . the badge belonging to the sovereign consists of a jewelled , 18-carat gold crown of ruby , emeralds , and sapphires , from which is suspended a white , enamelled , hexagonal snowflake design , with six equal leaves and diamonds between each . at the centre is a disc bearing a maple leaf in pavé-laid rubies on a white enamel background , surrounded at its edge by a red enamel ring ( annulus ) bearing the motto of the order . the chancellor wears the badge of a companion and is , upon installation as governor general , granted a livery collar for wear at order of canada investiture ceremonies . the badges for inductees are of a similar design to the sovereign 's badge , though without precious stones , and slight differences for each grade . for companions , the emblem is gilt with a red enamel maple leaf in the central disk ; for officers , it is gilt with a gold maple leaf ; and for members , both the badge itself and the maple leaf are silver . all are topped by a st . edward 's crown , symbolizing that the order is headed by the sovereign , and the reverse is plain except for the word canada . the ribbon is white and bordered in red stripes , similar to the flag of canada ; the chest ribbon is the same for each grade , save for a metallic maple leaf in the centre , the colour of which matches that on the badge of the grade that the wearer was appointed to . for civilian wear , a lapel pin is worn on the jacket , which is designed as a miniature of the medallion . wear of the insignia is according to guidelines issued by the chancellery of honours , which stipulate that the badges be worn before most other national orders , that is , at the end of an individual 's medal bar closest to the centre of the chest or at the wearer 's neck , with only the victoria cross , the cross of valour , and the badge of the order of merit permitted to be worn before the badges of the order of canada . those in the grades of companion or officer may wear their badges on a neck ribbon , while those in the member group display their insignia suspended by a ribbon from a medal bar on the left chest . protocol originally followed the british tradition , wherein female appointees wore their order of canada emblem on a ribbon bow positioned on the left shoulder . these regulations were altered in 1997 , and women may wear their insignia in either the traditional manner or in the same fashion as the men . with the patriation in 1988 of oversight of heraldry from the uk to canada through the canadian heraldic authority , the constitution of the order of canada was amended to include the entitlement of all inductees to petition the chief herald of canada for personal armorial bearings ( coats of arms ) , should they not already possess any . companions may receive supporters , and all members may have the escutcheon ( shield ) of their arms encircled with a red ribbon bearing the order 's motto in gold , and from which is suspended a rendition of the holder 's order of canada badge . the queen , sovereign of the order of canada , approved the augmentation of her royal arms for canada with the order 's ribbon in 1987 . on the grant to bishop 's college school , québec , the sovereign 's insignia of the order was depicted below the royal arms of canada , the only time the badge has been incorporated into a grant document .