Modernity

etymology . the late latin adjective modernus , a derivation from the adverb modo '' presently , just now '' , is attested from the 5th century , at first in the context of distinguishing the christian era from the pagan era . in the 6th century , cassiodorus appears to have been the first writer to use modernus '' modern '' regularly to refer to his own age . the terms antiquus and modernus were used in a chronological sense in the carolingian era . for example , a magister modernus referred to a contemporary scholar , as opposed to old authorities such as benedict of nursia . in early medieval usage , modernus referred to authorities younger than pagan antiquity and the early church fathers , but not necessarily to the present day , and could include authors several centuries old , from about the time of bede , i.e . referring to the time after the foundation of the order of saint benedict and/or the fall of the western roman empire . the latin adjective was adopted in middle french , as moderne , by the 15th century , and hence , in the early tudor period , into early modern english . the early modern word meant '' now existing '' , or '' pertaining to the present times '' , not necessarily with a positive connotation . shakespeare uses modern in the sense of '' every-day , ordinary , commonplace '' . the word entered wide usage in the context of the late 17th-century quarrel of the ancients and the moderns within the académie française , debating the question of '' is modern culture superior to classical ( græco–roman ) culture ? '' in the context of this debate , the '' ancients '' ( anciens ) and '' moderns '' ( modernes ) were proponents of opposing views , the former believing that contemporary writers could do no better than imitate the genius of classical antiquity , while the latter , first with charles perrault ( 1687 ) , proposed that more than a mere '' renaissance '' of ancient achievements , the '' age of reason '' had gone beyond what had been possible in the classical period . the term modernity , first coined in the 1620s , in this context assumed the implication of a historical epoch following the renaissance , in which the achievements of antiquity were surpassed . phases . modernity has been associated with cultural and intellectual movements of 1436–1789 and extending to the 1970s or later . according to marshall berman , modernity is periodized into three conventional phases dubbed '' early , '' '' classical , '' and '' late , '' respectively , by peter osborne : early modernity : 1500–1789 ( or 1453–1789 in traditional historiography ) people were beginning to experience a more modern life ( laughey , 31 ) . classical modernity : 1789–1900 ( corresponding to the long 19th century ( 1789–1914 ) in hobsbawm 's scheme ) consisted of the rise and growing use of daily newspapers , telegraphs , telephones and other forms of mass media , which influenced the growth of communicating on a broader scale ( laughey , 31 ) . late modernity : 1900–1989 consisted of the globalization of modern life ( laughey , 31 ) . in the second phase berman draws upon the growth of modern technologies such as the newspaper , telegraph and other forms of mass media . there was a great shift into modernization in the name of industrial capitalism . finally in the third phase , modernist arts and individual creativity marked the beginning of a new modernist age as it combats oppressive politics , economics as well as other social forces including mass media . some authors , such as lyotard and baudrillard , believe that modernity ended in the mid- or late 20th century and thus have defined a period subsequent to modernity , namely postmodernity ( 1930s/1950s/1990s–present ) . other theorists , however , regard the period from the late 20th century to the present as merely another phase of modernity ; zygmunt bauman . further reading . adem , seifudein . 2004 . '' decolonizing modernity : ibn-khaldun and modern historiography . '' in islam : past , present and future , international seminar on islamic thought proceedings , edited by ahmad sunawari long , jaffary awang , and kamaruddin salleh , 570–87 . salangor darul ehsan , malaysia : department of theology and philosophy , faculty of islamic studies , universiti kebangsaan malaysia . hannah arendt . 1958 . '' the origins of totalitarianism '' cleavland : world publishing co . christine buci-glucksmann . 1994 . baroque reason : the aesthetics of modernity . thousand oaks , calif : sage publications . ( cloth ) ( pbk ) carroll , michael thomas . 2000 . popular modernity in america : experience , technology , mythohistory . suny series in postmodern culture . albany : state university of new york press . ( hc ) ( pbk ) corchia , luca . 2008 . '' il concetto di modernità in jürgen habermas . un indice ragionato . '' the lab 's quarterly/il trimestrale del laboratorio 2:396ff . issn 2035-5548 . crouch , christopher . 2000 . '' modernism in art design and architecture , '' new york : st . martins press . ( cloth ) ( pbk ) davidann , jon thares . 2019 . '' the limits of westernization : american and east asians create modernity , 1860-1960 . '' oxford : routledge . davies , oliver . 2004 . '' the theological aesthetics '' . in the cambridge companion to hans urs von balthasar , edited by edward t . oakes and david moss , 131–42 . cambridge and new york : cambridge university press . dipper , christof : moderne ( modernity ) , version : 2.0 , in : docupedia zeitgeschichte , 22 . november 2018 eisenstadt , shmuel noah . 2003 . comparative civilizations and multiple modernities , 2 vols . leiden and boston : brill . william everdell 1997 . the first moderns . chicago : university of chicago press . ( cloth ) ; ( pbk ) . gaonkar , dilip parameshwar ( ed . ) . 2001 . alternative modernities . a millennial quartet book . durham : duke university press . ( cloth ) ; ( pbk ) giddens , anthony . 1990 . the consequences of modernity . stanford : stanford university press . ( cloth ) ; ( pbk ) ; cambridge , uk : polity press in association with basil blackwell , oxford . horváth , ágnes , 2013 . modernism and charisma . houndmills , basingstoke : palgrave macmillan . ( cloth ) mark jarzombek . 2000 . the psychologizing of modernity : art , architecture , history . cambridge : cambridge university press . kolakowsi , leszek . 1990 . modernity on endless trial . chicago : university of chicago press . mario kopić . sekstant . belgrade : službeni glasnik . bruno latour . 1993 . we have never been modern , translated by catherine porter . cambridge , ma : harvard university press . ( hb ) ( pbk . ) perreau-saussine , emile . 2005 . & nbsp ; . commentaire no . 109 ( spring ) : 181–93 . vinje , victor condorcet . 2017 . the challenges of modernity . nisus publications . wagner , peter . 1993 . a sociology of modernity : liberty and discipline . routledge : london . wagner , peter . 2001 . theorizing modernity . inescapability and attainability in social theory . sage : london . wagner , peter . 2008 . modernity as experience and interpretation : a new sociology of modernity . polity press : london . external links .

modernity , a topic in the humanities and social sciences , is both a historical period ( the modern era ) and the ensemble of particular socio-cultural norms , attitudes and practices that arose in the wake of the renaissancein the '' age of reason '' of 17th-century thought and the 18th-century '' enlightenment '' . some commentators consider the era of modernity to have ended by 1930 , with world war ii in 1945 , or the 1980s or 1990s ; the following era is called postmodernity . the term '' contemporary history '' is also used to refer to the post-1945 timeframe , without assigning it to either the modern or postmodern era . ( thus '' modern '' may be used as a name of a particular era in the past , as opposed to meaning '' the current era '' . ) depending on the field , '' modernity '' may refer to different time periods or qualities . in historiography , the 17th and 18th centuries are usually described as early modern , while the long 19th century corresponds to '' modern history '' proper . while it includes a wide range of interrelated historical processes and cultural phenomena ( from fashion to modern warfare ) , it can also refer to the subjective or existential experience of the conditions they produce , and their ongoing impact on human culture , institutions , and politics . as an analytical concept and normative idea , modernity is closely linked to the ethos of philosophical and aesthetic modernism ; political and intellectual currents that intersect with the enlightenment ; and subsequent developments such as existentialism , modern art , the formal establishment of social science , and contemporaneous antithetical developments such as marxism . it also encompasses the social relations associated with the rise of capitalism , and shifts in attitudes associated with secularization , liberalization , modernization and post-industrial life . by the late 19th and 20th centuries , modernist art , politics , science and culture has come to dominate not only western europe and north america , but almost every civilized area on the globe , including movements thought of as opposed to the west and globalization . the modern era is closely associated with the development of individualism , capitalism , urbanization and a belief in the possibilities of technological and political progress . wars and other perceived problems of this era , many of which come from the effects of rapid change , and the connected loss of strength of traditional religious and ethical norms , have led to many reactions against modern development . marx , durkheim , weber : formations of modern social thought by kenneth l . morrison . p . 294 . william schweiker , the blackwell companion to religious ethics . 2005 . p . 454 . ( cf . , '' in modernity , however , much of economic activity and theory seemed to be entirely cut off from religious and ethical norms , at least in traditional terms . many see modern economic developments as entirely secular . '' ) optimism and belief in constant progress has been most recently criticized by postmodernism while the dominance of western europe and anglo-america over other continents has been criticized by postcolonialism . in michel foucault 's view classified as a proponent of postmodernism though he himself rejected the '' postmodernism '' label , considering his work as '' a critical history of modernity '' , '' modernity '' as a historical category is marked by developments such as a questioning or rejection of tradition ; the prioritization of individualism , freedom and formal equality ; faith in inevitable social , scientific and technological progress , rationalization and professionalization , a movement from feudalism ( or agrarianism ) toward capitalism and the market economy , industrialization , urbanization and secularisation , the development of the nation-state , representative democracy , public education ( etc . ) . in the context of art history , '' modernity '' ( modernité ) has a more limited sense , '' modern art '' covering the period of & nbsp ; 1860–1970 . use of the term in this sense is attributed to charles baudelaire , who in his 1864 essay '' the painter of modern life '' , designated the '' fleeting , ephemeral experience of life in an urban metropolis '' , and the responsibility art has to capture that experience . in this sense , the term refers to '' a particular relationship to time , one characterized by intense historical discontinuity or rupture , openness to the novelty of the future , and a heightened sensitivity to what is unique about the present '' .