Clinton–Lewinsky scandal

allegations of sexual contact . lewinsky said she had sexual encounters with bill clinton on nine occasions from november 1995 to march 1997 . according to her published schedule , first lady hillary clinton was at the white house for at least some portion of seven of those days . in april 1996 , lewinsky 's superiors relocated her job to the pentagon , because they felt she was spending too much time around clinton . jeff leen ( january 24 , 1998 ) . '' lewinsky : two coasts , two lives , many images '' , the washington post . according to his autobiography , then-united nations ambassador bill richardson was asked by the white house in 1997 to interview lewinsky for a job on his staff at the un . richardson did so , and offered her a position , which she declined . the american spectator alleged that richardson knew more about the lewinsky affair than he declared to the grand jury . lewinsky confided in linda tripp about her relationship with clinton . tripp persuaded lewinsky to save the gifts clinton had given her , and not to dry clean a semen-stained blue dress in order to keep it as an '' insurance policy . '' tripp reported their conversations to literary agent lucianne goldberg , who advised her to secretly record them , us news and world report , '' the monica lewinsky tapes '' , february 2 , 1998 , v.124 n.4 p.23 . which tripp began doing in september 1997 . goldberg also urged tripp to take the tapes to independent counsel kenneth starr and bring them to the attention of people working on the paula jones case . in the fall of 1997 , goldberg began speaking to reporters ( including michael isikoff of newsweek ) about the tapes . in the paula jones case , lewinsky had submitted an affidavit that denied any physical relationship with clinton . in january 1998 , she attempted to persuade tripp to commit perjury in the jones case . instead , tripp gave the tapes to starr , who was investigating the whitewater controversy and other matters . starr was now armed with evidence of lewinsky 's admission of a physical relationship with clinton , and he broadened the investigation to include lewinsky and her possible perjury in the jones case . denial and subsequent admission . news of the scandal first broke on january 17 , 1998 , on the drudge report , '' newsweek kills story on white house intern '' , drudgereportarchives , 1998 . which reported that newsweek editors were sitting on a story by investigative reporter michael isikoff exposing the affair . the story broke in the mainstream press on january 21 in the washington post . the story swirled for several days and , despite swift denials from clinton , the clamor for answers from the white house grew louder . on january 26 , president clinton , standing with his wife , spoke at a white house press conference , and issued a denial in which he said : top 5 : political quotes that defined presidencies , apoliticus.com henry hyde , republican chair of the house judiciary committee and house manager , also had an affair while in office as a state legislator . hyde , aged 70 during the lewinsky hearings , dismissed it as a '' youthful indiscretion '' ( he had been 41 ) . talbot , david . '' this hypocrite broke up my family '' , salon , september 16 , 1998 . bob livingston republican congressman had been widely expected to become speaker of the united states house of representatives in the next congressional session . '' robert livingston , the heir apparent with a black belt '' . the new york times , november 10 , 1998 , p . a24 . retrieved september 21 , 2009 . then just weeks away after flynt revealed the affair , livingston resigned and challenged clinton to do the same . bob barr ( r-ga ) another republican house manager , had an affair while married . barr had been the first lawmaker in either chamber to call for clinton 's resignation due to the lewinsky affair . barr lost a primary challenge less than three years after the impeachment proceedings . mccaffrey , shannon . will bob barr be the ralph nader of '08 ? , associated press ( via cbs news ) , june 22 , 2008 . dan burton ( r-in ) said , '' no one , regardless of what party they serve , no one , regardless of what branch of government they serve , should be allowed to get away with these alleged sexual improprieties . '' baker , russ . '' portrait of a political 'pit bull ' '' , salon , december 22 , 1998 . in 1998 , burton admitted that he himself had had an affair in 1983 which produced a child . '' rep . dan burton—member of congress representing indiana 's 5th district '' , library factfiles , indianapolis star , updated january 2007 . retrieved february 25 , 2007 . newt gingrich ( r-ga ) us representative , speaker of the house and leader of the republican revolution of 1994 , '' gingrich expects 'republican revolution ' '' , news4jax.com , october 28 , 2010 . admitted in 1998 to having had an affair with then house agriculture committee staffer callista bisek while he was still married to his second wife , jacobs , john . '' the gingrich affair : hypocrisy and betrayal '' , november 22 , 1999 at the same time as he was leading the impeachment of bill clinton for perjury regarding an affair with intern monica lewinsky . schneider , bill . '' gingrich confession : clearing the way for a 2008 run ? '' , cnn . march 9 , 2007 . retrieved december 29 , 2009 . steven c . latourette ( r-oh ) us representative , voted to impeach bill clinton for the lewinsky scandal while he himself , was having a long-term affair with his chief of staff , jennifer laptook . ( 2003 ) falone , michael . cbs news . july 2 , 2009 , politico , '' gop 's unlucky class of '94 '' retrieved june 21 , 2010 . republican helen chenoweth-hage from idaho aggressively called for the resignation of president clinton and then admitted to her own six-year affair with a married rancher during the 1980s . . personal acceptance . historian taylor branch implied that clinton had requested changes to branch 's 2009 clinton biography , the clinton tapes : wrestling history with the president , regarding clinton 's revelation that the lewinsky affair began because '' i cracked ; i just cracked . '' branch writes that clinton had felt '' beleaguered , unappreciated , and open to a liaison with lewinsky '' following '' the democrats ' loss of congress in the november 1994 elections , the death of his mother the previous january , and the ongoing whitewater controversy '' . publicly , clinton had previously blamed the affair on '' a terrible moral error '' and on anger at republicans , stating , '' if people have unresolved anger , it makes them do non-rational , destructive things '' . . see also . bill clinton sexual misconduct allegations list of federal political scandals in the united states list of federal political sex scandals in the united states second-term curse . references . further reading . a chronology : key moments in the clinton-lewinsky saga . cnn . ( 1998 ) '' the fallout '' . bbc online in-depth coverage . ( 1999 ) . external links . monica lewinsky 2015 ted talk on bullying and the price of shame a guide to the monica lewinsky story—the coffee shop times ( last updated july 8 , 2001 ) the clinton/lewinsky story : how accurate ? how fair ? ( 2003 )

the clinton–lewinsky scandal was a united states political sex scandal that involved 49-year-old president bill clinton and 22-year-old white house intern monica lewinsky . the sexual relationship took place between 1995 and 1997 and came to light in 1998 . clinton ended a televised speech in late january 1998 with the statement that he '' did not have sexual relations with that woman , ms . lewinsky . '' further investigation led to charges of perjury and to the impeachment of bill clinton in 1998 by the u.s . house of representatives . he was subsequently acquitted on all impeachment charges of perjury and obstruction of justice in a 21-day senate trial . clinton was held in civil contempt of court by judge susan webber wright for giving misleading testimony in the paula jones regarding lewinsky and was also fined 90,000 by wright . his license to practice law was suspended in arkansas for five years ; shortly thereafter , he was disbarred from presenting cases in front of the united states supreme court . lewinsky was a graduate of lewis & clark college . she was hired during clinton 's first term in 1995 as an intern at the white house and was later an employee of the white house office of legislative affairs . some believe that clinton began a personal relationship with her while she worked at the white house , the details of which she later confided to linda tripp , her defense department co-worker who secretly recorded their telephone conversations . in january 1998 , tripp discovered that lewinsky had sworn an affidavit in the paula jones case , denying a relationship with clinton . she delivered tapes to ken starr , the independent counsel who was investigating clinton on other matters , including the whitewater scandal , the white house fbi files controversy , and the white house travel office controversy . during the grand jury testimony , clinton 's responses were carefully worded , and he argued , '' it depends on what the meaning of the word 'is ' is , '' with regard to the truthfulness of his statement that '' there is not a sexual relationship , an improper sexual relationship or any other kind of improper relationship . '' president bill clinton , the newshour with jim lehrer , january 21 , 1998 . the wide reporting of the scandal led to criticism of the press for over-coverage . this scandal is sometimes referred to as '' monicagate , '' rich , frank . '' journal ; monicagate year two '' , the new york times , december 16 , 1998 . '' lewinskygate , '' rich , frank . '' journal ; days of the locust '' , the new york times , february 25 , 1998 . '' tailgate , '' hennenberger , melinda . '' the president under fire '' , the new york times , january 29 , 1998 . '' sexgate , '' james barron with hoban , phoebe . '' dueling soaps '' , the new york times , january 28 , 1998 . and '' zippergate , '' following the '' -gate '' construction that has been used since watergate .