Thracians

etymology . the first historical record of the thracians is found in the iliad , where they are described as allies of the troy in the trojan war against the ancient greeks . the ethnonym thracian comes from ancient greek θρᾷξ ( plural θρᾷκες ; , or θρᾴκιος ; ionic : θρηίκιος , , and the toponym thrace comes from θρᾴκη ; ionic : θρῄκη , . navicula bacchi – θρηικίη ( accessed : october 13 , 2008 ) . these forms are all exonyms as applied by the greeks . john boardman , i.e.s . edwards , e . sollberger , and n.g.l . hammond . the cambridge ancient history , volume 3 , part 2 : the assyrian and babylonian empires and other states of the near east , from the eighth to the sixth centuries bc . cambridge university press , 1992 , p . 597 . '' we have no way of knowing what the thracians called themselves and if indeed they had a common name . thus the name of thracians and that of their country were given by the greeks to a group of hellenic tribes occupying the territory . '' . mythological foundation . in greek mythology , thrax ( by his name simply the quintessential thracian ) was regarded as one of the reputed sons of the god ares . lemprière and wright , p . 358 . '' mars was father of cupid , anteros , and harmonia , by the goddess venus . he had ascalaphus and ialmenus by astyoche ; alcippe by agraulos ; molus , pylus , euenus , and othestius , by demonice the daughter of agenor . besides these , he was the reputed father of romulus , oenomaus , bythis , thrax , diomedes of thrace , & c . '' in the alcestis , euripides mentions that one of the names of ares himself was '' thrax '' since he was regarded as the patron of thrace ( his golden or gilded shield was kept in his temple at bistonia in thrace ) . euripides , p . 95 . '' line 58 . 'thrace 's golden shield ' – one of the names of ares was thrax , he being the patron of thrace . his golden or gilded shield was kept in his temple at bistonia there . like the other thracian bucklers , it was of the shape of a half-moon ( 'pelta ' ) . his 'festival of mars gradivus ' was kept annually by the latins in the month of march , when this sort of shield was displayed . '' . origins . the origins of the thracians remain obscure , in the absence of written historical records . evidence of proto-thracians in the prehistoric period depends on artifacts of material culture . leo klejn identifies proto-thracians with the multi-cordoned ware culture that was pushed away from ukraine by the advancing timber grave culture or srubnaya . it is generally proposed that a proto-thracian people developed from a mixture of neolithic europe and indo-europeans from the time of proto-indo-european expansion in the early bronze age hoddinott , p . 27 . when the latter , around 1500 bc , mixed with indigenous peoples . casson , p . 3 . during the iron age ( about 1000 bc ) dacians and thracians began developing from proto-thracians . john boardman , i.e.s . edwards , e . sollberger , and n.g.l . hammond . the cambridge ancient history , volume 3 , part 1 : the prehistory of the balkans , the middle east and the aegean world , tenth to eighth centuries bc . cambridge university press , 1982 , p . 53 . '' yet we can not identify the thracians at that remote period , because we do not know for certain whether the thracian and illyrian tribes had separated by then . it is safer to speak of proto-thracians from whom there developed in the iron age . '' ancient greek and roman historians agreed that the ancient thracians , who were of indo-european stock and language , were superior fighters ; only their constant political fragmentation prevented them from overrunning the lands around the northeastern mediterranean . although these historians characterized the thracians as primitive partly because they lived in simple , open villages , the thracians in fact had a fairly advanced culture that was especially noted for its poetry and music . their soldiers were valued as mercenaries , particularly by the macedonians and romans . identity and distribution . divided into separate tribes , the thracians did not manage to form a lasting political organization until the odrysian was founded in the fifth century bc . a strong dacian state appeared in the first century bc , during the reign of king burebista . the mountainous regions were home to various peoples , including the illyrians , regarded as warlike and ferocious thracian tribes , while the plains peoples were apparently regarded as more peaceable . thracians inhabited parts of the ancient provinces of thrace , moesia , macedonia , beotia , attica , dacia , scythia minor , sarmatia , bithynia , mysia , pannonia , and other regions of the balkans and anatolia . this area extended over most of the balkans region , and the getae north of the danube as far as beyond the bug and including pannonia in the west . the catalogue of kimbell art museum 's 1998 exhibition ancient gold : the wealth of the thracians indicates a historical extent of thracian settlement including most of the ukraine , all of hungary and parts of slovakia . ( kimbell art – exhibitions ) there were about 200 thracian tribes . mircea eliade , ioan petru culianu , humanitas , bucuresti , 1993 , p.267 . . history . homeric period . the thracians are mentioned in homer 's illyiad , meaning that they had been already present in the eigth century bc . homer . the iliad with an english translation by a.t . murray , ph.d . in two volumes . cambridge , ma . , harvard university press ; london , william heinemann , ltd . 1924 : at 2.581 altschuler , e.l . , calude , a.s . , meade , a . and pagel , m . ( 2013 ) , linguistic evidence supports date for homeric epics . bioessays , 35 : 417-420 . . archaic period . the first greek colonies in thrace were founded in the eighth century bc . simon hornblower and antony spawforth . the oxford classical dictionary . oxford university press , 1996 , p . 1515 . '' from the 8th century bc the coast thrace was colonised by greeks . '' thrace south of the danube ( except for the land of the bessi ) was ruled for nearly half a century by the persians under darius the great , who conducted an expedition into the region from 513 to 512 bc . the persians called thrace '' skudra '' . susan wise bauer . the history of the ancient world : from the earliest accounts to the fall of rome . w.w . norton & company , 2007 , p . 517 . '' megabazus turned thrace into a new persian satrapy , skudra . '' . classical period . . achaemenid thrace . webber , christopher , the gods of battle , the thracians at war 1500 bc- 150 ad pen & sword books , barnsley , 2011 . further reading . kaul , flemming . '' the gundestrup cauldron : thracian art , celtic motifs '' . in : etudes celtiques , vol . 37 , 2011 . pp . 81-110 . doi : www.persee.fr/doc/ecelt_0373-1928_2011_num_37_1_2326 . external links . thrace and the thracians ( 700 bc to 46 ad ) ancient thracians . art , culture , history , treasures information on ancient thrace video about the thracians and thracian warfare

the thracians ; thrāikes ; were an indo-european people who inhabited large parts of eastern and southeast europe in ancient history . . '' the thracians were an indo-european people who occupied the area between northern greece , southern russia , and north-western turkey . they shared the same language and culture . there may have been as many as a million thracians , diveded among up to 40 tribes . '' . '' one of the best documented indo-european civilizations that inhabited bulgaria is the thracians . '' thracians resided mainly in the balkans , but were also located in asia minor and other locations in eastern europe . the exact origin of thracians is unknown , but it is believed that proto-thracians descended from a mixture of indo-europeans and neolithic europe during the second millennium bc . the proto-thracian culture developed into the dacian and thracian culture . thracian culture was described as tribe by the ancient greece and romans . they remained largely disunited with the first permanent state being the odrysian kingdom in the fifth century bc . they faced subjugation by the achaemenid empire around the same time . thracians experienced a short period of peace after the persians were defeated by the greeks in the persian wars . the odrysian kingdom lost independence to macedonia in the late 4th century bc , and never regained total independence following alexander the great 's death . the thracians faced conquest by the romans in the mid second century bc under whom they faced internal strife . they composed major parts of rebellions against the romans along with the macedonians until the third macedonian war . thracians were integrated into roman society and later converted to christianity . the last reported use of a thracian language was by monks in the sixth century ad . thracians were described as '' warlike '' and '' barbarians '' by the greeks and romans and were favored as mercenaries . ancient descriptions of a vicious people are disputed and archaeology has been used since the mid-twentieth century in southern bulgaria to identify more about them . thracians spoke the extinct thracian language and shared a common culture . they followed a polytheism with the exception of the monotheism dacians who worshipped zalmoxis . the study of the thracians is known as thracology .