Smithfield, London

20th century . during the second world war , a large underground cold store at smithfield was the theatre of secret experiments led by max perutz on pykrete , a mixture of ice and woodpulp , believed to be possibly tougher than steel . perutz 's work , inspired by geoffrey pyke and part of project habakkuk , was meant to test the viability of pykrete as a material to construct floating airstrips in the atlantic to allow refuelling of cargo planes in support of lord louis mountbatten 's operations . the experiments were carried out by perutz and his colleagues in a refrigerated meat locker in a smithfield market butcher 's basement , behind a protective screen of frozen animal carcasses . these experiments became obsolete with the development of longer-range aircraft , resulting in abandonment of the project . at the end of the second world war , a v-2 rocket struck the north side of charterhouse street , near the junction with farringdon road ( 1945 ) . the explosion caused massive damage to the market buildings , affecting the railway tunnel structure below , and causing more than 110 deaths . the original poultry market designed by sir horace jones was destroyed by fire in 1958 . its replacement building was designed by sir thomas bennett in 1962–63 , with a reinforced concrete frame , and external cladding of dark blue brick . it is listed building . the main hall is covered by an enormous concrete dome , shaped as an elliptical paraboloid , spanning by and only thick at the centre . the dome is believed to have been the largest concrete shell structure built at that time in europe . . today . smithfield is the city of london 's only major wholesale market ( leadenhall market nowadays attracts more tourist trade ) which has escaped relocation out of central london to cheaper land , better transport links , and more modern facilities . ( covent garden , spitalfields and billingsgate have all relocated ) . the market operates to supply inner city butchers , shops and restaurants with quality fresh meat , and so its main trading hours are 4:00 & nbsp ; a.m . to 12:00 & nbsp ; noon each weekday . instead of moving away , smithfield market continues to modernise its existing site : its imposing victorian buildings have had access points added for the loading and unloading of lorry . the buildings stand above a warren of tunnels : previously , live animals were brought to market by hoof ( from the mid-19th century onwards they arrived by rail ) and were slaughtered on site . the former railway tunnels are now used for storage , parking and as basements . an impressive cobbled ramp spirals down around west smithfield 's public garden , on the south side of the market , providing access to part of this area . some of the buildings on charterhouse street on smithfield north side maintain access to the tunnels via their basements . some of the former meat market buildings have now changed use . for example , the former central cold store , on charterhouse street is now , most unusually , a city centre cogeneration power station operated by citigen . chp plant ( e.on ) accessed 13 april 2009 the metropolitan cold stores was converted in 1999 into the nightclub fabric . smithfield comprises the market as its central feature , surrounded by many old buildings on three sides and a public open space ( or rotunda garden ) at west smithfield , beneath which there is a public car park . the south side is occupied by st bartholomew 's hospital ( known as barts in common parlance ) , and on the east side by the priory church of st bartholomew the great . the church of st bartholomew the less is located next to the king henry viii gate , the hospital 's main entrance . the north and south of the square are now closed to through traffic , as part of the city 's security and surveillance cordon known as the ring of steel . security for the market is provided by its market constabulary . . future . in early 2019 , it was proposed in plans put forward by the court of common council , the city of london corporation 's main decision-making body , that billingsgate fish market , new spitalfields market , and smithfield market would move to a new consolidated site in barking reach . a formal planning application was made in june 2020 . . demolition and development plans . since 2005 , the general market ( 1883 ) and the adjacent fish market and red house buildings ( 1898 ) , part of the victorian complex of the smithfield market , have been facing a threat of demolition . the city of london corporation , ultimate owners of the property , has been engaged in public consultation to assess how best to redevelop their disused property and regenerate the area . former property developers thornfield properties had planned to demolish the historic site and build a seven-storey office block , offering of office space , with a retail outlet on the ground floor . general market , smithfields market , urban75 several campaigns , promoted by english heritage and save britain 's heritage among others , were run to raise public awareness of this part of london 's victorian heritage . grade ii listed building protection was approved for the red house cold store building in 2005 by then-culture secretary tessa jowell , on the basis of new historical evidence qualifying the complex as '' the earliest existing example of a purpose-built powered cold store '' . whilst the market continues to trade , its future remains unclear following government planning minister ruth kelly 's instigating a major public inquiry in 2007 . the public inquiry for the demolition and redevelopment of the general market building took place between 6 november 2007 and 25 january 2008 . in august 2008 , communities secretary hazel blears announced that planning permission for the general market 's redevelopment had been refused , stating that the threatened buildings made '' a significant contribution '' to the character and appearance of farringdon and the surrounding area . on 12 october 2012 , henderson group unveiled its £160 million-plan for redeveloping the western side of the central market . henderson proposed that the fish market , general market and red house buildings , all over a century old , be demolished to make way for restaurants , retailers and office buildings , while they would restore and retain much of the market building 's original perimeter walls , with a new piazza being created in the general market . marcus binney of the campaign group save britain 's heritage said : '' this proposal constitutes the worst mutilation of a victorian landmark in the last 30 years . '' some of the buildings on lindsey street opposite the east market were demolished in 2010 to allow the construction of the new crossrail station at farringdon . the demolished buildings include smithfield house ( an early 20th-century unlisted françois hennebique building ) , the edmund martin ltd . shop ( an earlier building with alterations dating to the 1930s ) , and two victorian warehouses behind them . in march 2015 , the museum of london revealed plans to vacate its barbican site and move into the general market building . the cost of the move is estimated to be in the region of £70 million and , if funding can be achieved , would be complete by 2021 . . gallery . file : smithfield-meatmarket-large.jpg the central market and grand avenue from the south file : grand avenue smithfield market.jpg the entrance of the grand avenue from the south file : inside smithfield market ii , ec1.jpg inside the poultry market file : market interior.jpg market interior file : smithfield meat market abandoned 1.jpg the general market ( now abandoned ) file : smithfield meat market abandoned 3.jpg inside the general market ( now abandoned ) file : east poultry avenue smithfield market.jpg east poultry avenue file : butchers ' hall ( london ) . jpg butchers ' hall file : st bartholomew the great , west smithfield , london ec1 - cloisters - geograph.org.uk - 1142485.jpg st bartholomew the great priory church 's cloisters and barts hospital file : st bartholomew the less , st bartholomews hospital , west smithfield , london ec1 - geograph.org.uk - 1140929.jpg st bartholomew the less & barts hospital file : st john 's gate 2007 5.jpg st john 's gate file : charterhouseec1.jpg charterhouse square file : port of london com.jpg the port of london authority building file : cold storage 1.jpg the former central cold store , currently a power station

as of . the listed building main wings ( known as east and west market ) are separated by the grand avenue , a wide roadway roofed by an elliptical arch with decorations in cast iron . at the two ends of the arcade , four prominent statues represent london , edinburgh , liverpool and dublin ; they depict bronze dragons charged with the city 's coat of arms . at the corners of the market , four octagonal pavilion towers were built , each with a dome displaying carved stone griffins . as the market was being built , a cut and cover railway tunnel was constructed underground city street level to create a triangular junction with the railway between blackfriars and kings cross through snow hill tunnel . closed in 1916 , it has been revived and is now used for thameslink rail services . snowhill ( london railways ) accessed 13 april 2009 the construction of extensive railway sidings , beneath smithfield park , facilitated the transfer of animal carcasses to its cool store , and directly up to the meat market via lifts . these sidings closed in the 1960s . they are now used as a car park , accessed via a cobbled descent at the centre of smithfield park . today , much of the meat is delivered to market by road . the first extension of smithfield 's meat market took place between 1873 and 1876 with the construction of the poultry market immediately west of the central market . a rotunda was built at the centre of the old market field ( now west smithfield ) , comprising gardens , a fountain and a ramped carriageway to the station beneath the market building . further buildings were subsequently added to the market . the general market , built between 1879 and 1883 , was intended to replace the old farringdon market located nearby and established for the sale of fruit and vegetables when the earlier fleet market was cleared to enable the laying out of farringdon street between 1826–1830 . a further block ( also known as annexe market or triangular block , ) consisting of two separate structures ( the fish market and the red house ) , was built between 1886 and 1899 . the fish market , built by mowlem , was completed in 1888 , one year after sir horace jones ' death . the red house , with its imposing red brick and portland stone façade , was built between 1898 and 1899 for the london central markets cold storage co . ltd . it was one of the first cool store to be built outside the london docks and continued to serve smithfield market until the mid-1970s .