Alexis de Tocqueville

tocqueville 's opposition to the invasion of kabylie . in opposition to olivier le cour grandmaison , jean-louis benoît said that given the extent of racial prejudices during the colonization of algeria , tocqueville was one of its '' most moderate supporters '' . benoît said that it was wrong to assume tocqueville was a supporter of bugeaud despite his 1841 apologetic discourse . it seems that tocqueville modified his views after his second visit to algeria in 1846 as he criticized bugeaud 's desire to invade kabylie in an 1847 speech to the assembly . although tocqueville had favoured retention of distinct traditional law , administrators , schools and so on for arabs who had come under french control , he judged the berber tribes of kabylie ( in his second of two letters on algeria , 1837 ) as '' savages '' not suited for this arrangement because he argued they would best be managed not by force of arms , but by the pacifying influences of commerce and cultural interaction . tocqueville 's views on the matter were complex . although in his 1841 report on algeria he applauded bugeaud for making war in a way that defeated abd-el-kader 's resistance , he had advocated in the two letters that the french military advance leave kabylie undisturbed and in subsequent speeches and writings he continued to oppose intrusion into kabylie . in the debate about the 1846 extraordinary funds , tocqueville denounced bugeaud 's conduct of military operations and succeeded in convincing the assembly not to vote funds in support of bugeaud 's military columns . tocqueville , , iii , 1 , gallimard , 1962 , pp . 299–300 . tocqueville considered bugeaud 's plan to invade kabylie despite the opposition of the assembly as a seditious act in the face of which the government was opting for cowardice . tocqueville , , iii , 1 , gallimard , 1962 , p . 303 . tocqueville , , iii , 1 , gallimard , 1962 , pp . 299–306 . . 1847 '' report on algeria '' . in his 1847 '' report on algeria '' , tocqueville declared that europe should avoid making the same mistake they made with the european colonization of the americas in order to avoid the bloody consequences . jean-louis benoît . '' arguments in favor of tocqueville '' . more particularly he reminds his countrymen of a solemn caution whereby he warns them that if the methods used towards the algerian people remain unchanged , colonization will end in a blood bath . tocqueville includes in his report on algeria that the fate of their soldiers and finances depended on how the french government treats the various native populations of algeria , including the various arab tribes , independent kabyles living in the atlas mountains and the powerful political leader abd-el-kader . in his various letters and essays on algeria , tocqueville discusses contrasting strategies by which a european country can approach imperialism . in particular , the author differentiates between what he terms '' dominance '' and a particular version of '' colonization '' . alexis de tocqueville , writings on empire and slavery , ed . jennifer pitts , johns hopkins ( baltimore ) , 2001 , pp . 57–64 . the latter stresses the obtainment and protection of land and passageways that promise commercial wealth . in the case of algeria , the port of algiers and the control over the strait of gibraltar were considered by tocqueville to be particularly valuable whereas direct control of the political operations of the entirety of algeria was not . thus , the author stresses domination over only certain points of political influence as a means to colonization of commercially valuable areas . tocqueville argued that though unpleasant , domination via violent means is necessary for colonization and justified by the laws of war . such laws are not discussed in detail , but given that the goal of the french mission in algeria was to obtain commercial and military interest as opposed to self-defense , it can be deduced that tocqueville would not concur with just war theory 's jus ad bellum criteria of just cause . further , given that tocqueville approved of the use of force to eliminate civilian housing in enemy territory , his approach does not accord with just war theory 's jus in bello criteria of proportionality and discrimination . de tocqueville . writings on empire and slavery , ed . jennifer pitts ( 2001 ) , pp . 57–64 , 70–78 . . the old regime and the revolution . in 1856 , tocqueville published the old regime and the revolution . the book analyzes french society before the french revolution—the so-called ancien régime—and investigates the forces that caused the revolution . references in popular literature . tocqueville was quoted in several chapters of toby young 's memoirs how to lose friends and alienate people to explain his observation of widespread homogeneity of thought even amongst intellectual elites at harvard university during his time spent there . he is frequently quoted and studied in american history classes . tocqueville is the inspiration for australian novelist peter carey in his 2009 novel parrot and olivier in america . . works . alexis de tocqueville and gustave de beaumont in america : their friendship and their travels , edited by olivier zunz , translated by arthur goldhammer ( university of virginia press , 2011 , , 698 pages . includes previously unpublished letters , essays , and other writings . ( 1833 ) – on the penitentiary system in the united states and its application to france , with gustave de beaumont . ( 1835/1840 ) – democracy in america . it was published in two volumes , the first in 1835 , the second in 1840 . english language versions : tocqueville , democracy in america , trans . and eds , harvey c . mansfield and delba winthrop , university of chicago press , 2000 ; tocqueville , democracy in america ( arthur goldhammer , trans . ; olivier zunz , ed . ) ( the library of america , 2004 ) . ( 1856 ) – the old regime and the revolution . it is tocqueville 's second most famous work . recollections ( 1893 ) – this work was a private journal of the revolution of 1848 . he never intended to publish this during his lifetime ; it was published by his wife and his friend gustave de beaumont after his death . journey to america ( 1831–1832 ) – alexis de tocqueville 's travel diary of his visit to america ; translated into english by george lawrence , edited by j.-p . mayer , yale university press , 1960 ; based on vol . v , 1 of the of tocqueville . l'etat social et politique de la france avant et depuis 1789 – alexis de tocqueville memoir on pauperism : does public charity produce an idle and dependant class of society ? ( 1835 ) originally published by ivan r . dee . inspired by a trip to england . one of tocqueville 's more obscure works . journeys to england and ireland , 1835 .

tocqueville thought the conquest of algeria was important for two reasons : first , his understanding of the international situation and france 's position in the world ; and second , changes in french society . tocqueville believed that war and colonization would '' restore national pride , threatened '' , he believed , by '' the gradual softening of social mores '' in the middle classes . their taste for '' material pleasures '' was spreading to the whole of society , giving it '' an example of weakness and egotism '' . alexis de tocqueville , '' rapports sur l'algérie '' , in , paris , gallimard , bibliothèque de la pléiade , 1991 , p . 806 , quoted in applauding the methods of general bugeaud , tocqueville went so far to claim that '' war in africa is a science . everyone is familiar with its rules and everyone can apply those rules with almost complete certainty of success . one of the greatest services that field marshal bugeaud has rendered his country is to have spread , perfected and made everyone aware of this new science '' . tocqueville advocated racial segregation in algeria with two distinct legislations , one for european colonists and one for the arab population . , p . 752 . quoted in such a two-tier arrangement would be fully realised with the adolphe crémieux and the indigénat , which extended french citizenship to european settlers and algerian jews whereas muslim algerians would be governed by muslim law and restricted to a second-class citizenship .