Huey P. Newton

peoples temple of the disciples of christ . in january 1977 , jim jones , leader of the peoples temple of the disciples of christ ( commonly shortened to the peoples temple ) , visited huey newton in havana , cuba . that same year after jones fled to '' jonestown , '' a commune he established in guyana for his followers , newton spoke to temple members in jonestown via telephone expressing support for jones during one of the temple 's earliest '' white nights . '' newton 's cousin , stanley clayton , was one of the few residents of jonestown to escape the area before the 1978 mass murder of over 900 temple members by jones and his fanatics through forced suicide . . writing and scholarship . newton received a bachelor 's degree from the university of california , santa cruz in 1974 . in 1978 , while in prison , newton met evolutionary biologist robert trivers after newton applied to do a reading course with trivers as part of a graduate degree in history of consciousness . he and trivers became close friends , and they published an analysis of the role of flight crew self-deception in the 1982 crash of air florida flight 90 . newton earned a ph.d . in the social philosophy program of history of consciousness from the university of california at santa cruz in 1980 . his doctoral dissertation entitled war against the panthers : a study of repression in america '' analyzes certain features of the party and incidents that are significant in its development . '' among which are how the united states federal government responded to the bpp ; in addition to the assassinations of fred hampton , bunchy carter , and john huggins . sources for material used to support the dissertation include two federal civil rights lawsuits . one suit was against the fbi and other government officials , while the other was initially against the city of chicago . later , newton 's widow , fredrika newton , would discuss her husband 's often-ignored academic research during c-span 's american perspectives program on february 18 , 2006 . . works . — oral history ( paredon records , 1970 ) , franz schurmann ( introduction ) ( random house , 1972 ) , with j . herman blake ( random house , 1973 ; republished in 1995 with introduction by blake ) , with ericka huggins ( 1975 ) the crash of flight 90 : doomed by self-deception ? , with robert trivers ( science digest , 1982 ) ( harlem river press , 1996 : the published version of newton 's phd thesis ) , edited by david hilliard and donald weise ( seven stories press , 2002 ) essays from the minister of defense , black panther party , 1968 , oakland ( pamphlet ) the genius of huey p . newton , awesome records ( june 1 , 1993 ) the original vision of the black panther party , black panther party ( 1973 ) newton talks to the movement about the black panther party , cultural nationalism , sncc , liberals and white revolutionaries ( the movement , 1968 ) , edited by toni morrison , foreword by elaine brown ( random house , 1972 ; city lights publishers , 2009 ) , edited by david hilliard and donald weise , introduction by elaine brown ( seven stories press , 2019 ) . death . on august 22 , 1989 , newton was murdered in the neighborhood of lower bottoms in west oakland , california . within days , tyrone robinson was arrested as a suspect ; he was on parole and admitted the murder to police , claiming self-defense – though police found no evidence that newton was carrying a gun . 'arrest in murder of huey newton ' ; the new york times , august 26 , 1989 in 1991 , robinson was convicted of first-degree murder and sentenced to a prison term of 32 years to life . robinson stated that his motive was to advance in the black guerrilla family , a marxist–leninist narcotics prison gang , in order to get a crack franchise . associated press , '' man guilty in huey newton death '' , los angeles times , october 10 , 1991 ; accessed march 12 , 2018 newton 's funeral was held at allen temple baptist church , where he attended following his conversion . some 1,300 mourners were accommodated inside , and another 500 to 600 listened to the service from outside . newton 's achievements in civil rights and work on behalf of black children and families with the black panther party were celebrated . newton 's body was cremated , and his ashes were interred at evergreen cemetery in oakland . . in popular culture . in the song '' changes '' by tupac shakur , newton is referenced in the lyrics '' it 's time to fight back , that 's what huey said . two shots in the dark , now huey 's dead '' - although the lyrics were mistaken about the number of times newton was shot when he was murdered . in the song '' propaganda '' ( 2000 ) by dead prez , on their album let 's get free , newton is referenced in the lyrics '' 31 years ago i would 've been a panther . they killed huey cause they knew he had the answer . the views that you see in the news is propaganda . '' as well as in the outro of the song , which samples an interview with newton : outro : huey p . newton uh , we view each other with a great love and a great understanding . and that we try to expand this to the general black population , and also , people -- oppressed people all over the world . and , i think that we differ from some other groups simply because we understand the system better than most groups understand the system . and with this realization , we attempt to form a strong political base based in the community with the only strength that we have and that 's the strength of a potentially destructive force if we do n't get freedom . the song '' up in arms '' ( 2015 ) by american songwriter bhi bhiman is based on newton 's life . agnès varda 's 1968 documentary on the black panthers features extensive interviews with newton during his incarceration . the boondocks comic strip by aaron mcgruder , and related tv cartoon , features a main character known as huey freeman , a 10-year-old african-american revolutionary , who was named after newton ; freeman starts an independent newspaper , dubbing it the free huey world report . the song '' same thing '' ( 2007 ) by band flobots mentions huey p . newton : '' somewhere between prayer and revolution , between jesus and huey p . newton , that 's where you find jonny 5 shoot shootin ' , water guns at the audience while ya scootin ' . '' newton is mentioned in the song '' mortal man '' ( 2015 ) by kendrick lamar : '' how many leaders you said you needed then left ‘ em for dead ? is it moses ? is it huey newton or detroit red ? '' newton is also mentioned by the game in the song dreams '' the dream of huey newton , that 's what i 'm livin ' through '' the fourth track on st . vincent 's 2014 st . vincent album is named after newton newton is mentioned in the ramshackle glory song '' from here till utopia '' newton is mentioned in public enemy 's welcome to the terrordome , '' the shooting of huey newton , from a hand of a nig who pulled the trig '' the song '' free huey '' by the boo radleys , from their kingsize album ( 1998 ) is about the activities of the black panther party when huey newton was an activist . the title of the song '' huey knew '' by ab-soul is a nod to huey newton . newton is mentioned in buddy and asap ferg 's black , '' i feel like trayvon with this black hoodie on , huey p . newton '' kendrick lamar also mentioned newton in the song hiiipower from his debut album section.80 , '' huey newton going stupid you ca n't resist his/ hiiipower '' . at the 1:06:54 mark of the stand up comedy special “ richard pryor : live in concert “ , richard pryor requests the house lights be turned on , and points out and introduces huey newton in the crowd , and thanks him for his attendance . newton is mentioned/discussed in the 1998 film bulworth as to '' why there 's no more black leaders in america ? '' . see also . the black panthers : vanguard of the revolution eldridge cleaver cointelpro angela davis george jackson new left people v . newton soledad brothers white panther party young lords . references . further reading . elaine brown . a taste of power . ( anchor books , 1993 ) . philip s . foner ( editor ) . the black panthers speak – the manifesto of the party : the first complete documentary record of the panther 's program ( dial , 1970 ) hillard , david with zimmerman , keith and kent . huey : spirit of the panther ( thunder 's mouth press , 2005 ) '' people of the state of california , plaintiff & respondent , vs . huey p . newton , defendant and appellant : appellant 's opening brief '' ( eric reports ) hevesi , dennis . '' huey newton symbolized the rising black anger of a generation '' ( obituary ) , the new york times , august 23 , 1989 . horowitz , david . '' hating whitey and other progressive causes '' spence pub , september 1 , 1999 . external links . civil rights greensboro : huey p . newton video interview on african american history channel online audiorecordings and video of huey newton via uc berkeley black panther site 1968 interview with newton newton discography on folkways a huey p . newton story , official film site a huey p . newton story , directed by spike lee , as shown on pbs dr . huey p . newton foundation black panther tours huey p . newton 's doctoral dissertation '' war against the panthers '' via internet archive the women 's liberation and gay liberation movements : speech given by huey newton

which prevented further prosecution on the two charges . elaine brown took over as chairperson of the black panther party in his absence . newton returned to the united states in 1977 to stand trial for the murder of smith and the assault on callins . in october 1977 , three black panthers attempted to assassinate crystal gray , a key prosecution witness in newton 's upcoming trial who had been present the day of kathleen smith 's murder . unbeknownst to the assailants , they attacked the wrong house and the occupant returned fire . during the shootout one of the panthers , louis johnson , was killed , and the other two assailants escaped . one of the two surviving assassins , flores forbes , fled to las vegas , nevada , with the help of panther paramedic nelson malloy . in november 1977 , malloy was found by park rangers paralyzed from the waist down from bullet wounds to the back in a shallow grave in the desert outside of las vegas . according to malloy , he and forbes were ordered by '' higher‐ups '' to be killed to eliminate any eyewitness accounts of the attempted murder of crystal gray . malloy recovered from the assault and told police that fellow panthers rollin reid and allen lewis were behind his attempted murder . newton denied any involvement or knowledge , and said that the events '' might have been the result of overzealous party members . '' during newton 's trial for assaulting preston callins , callins changed his testimony several times and eventually told the jury that he did not know who assaulted him . newton was acquitted of the assault in september 1978 , but was convicted of illegal firearms possession . after the assassination attempt on crystal gray , she declined to testify against newton . after two trials and two deadlocked juries , the prosecution decided not to retry newton for smith 's murder .