White people

physical descriptions in antiquity . according to anthropologist nina jablonski : contrary to most other caribbean places , puerto rico gradually became predominantly populated by european immigrants . puerto ricans of spanish , italian ( primarily via corsica ) and french descent comprise the majority . ( see : spanish settlement of puerto rico ) . in 1899 , one year after the u.s acquired the island , 61.8 % or 589,426 people self-identified as white . one hundred years later ( 2000 ) , the total increased to 80.5 % ( 3,064,862 ) ; not because there has been an influx of whites toward the island ( or an exodus of non-white people ) , but a change of race conceptions , mainly because of puerto rican elites to portray puerto rico 's image as the '' white island of the antilles '' , partly as a response to scientific racism . how puerto rico became white—university of wisconsin-madison . ( pdf ) . hundreds are from corsica , france , italy , portugal , lebanon , ireland , scotland , and germany , along with large numbers of immigrants from spain . this was the result of granted land from spain during the real cedula de gracias de 1815 ( royal decree of graces of 1815 ) , which allowed european catholics to settle in the island with a certain amount of free land . between 1960 and 1990 , the census questionnaire in puerto rico did not ask about race or color . racial categories therefore disappeared from the dominant discourse on the puerto rican nation . however , the 2000 census included a racial self-identification question in puerto rico and , for the first time in since 1950 , allowed respondents to choose more than one racial category to indicate mixed ancestry . ( only 4.2 % chose two or more races . ) with few variations , the census of puerto rico used the same questionnaire as in the u.s . mainland . according to census reports , most islanders responded to the new federally mandated categories on race and ethnicity by declaring themselves '' white '' ; few declared themselves to be black or some other race . representation of racial identity among island puerto ricans . mona.uwi.edu . however , it was estimated 20 % of white puerto ricans may have black ancestry . . uruguay . uruguayans and argentina share closely related demographic ties . different estimates state that uruguay 's population of 3.4 million is composed of 88 % to 93 % white uruguayans . uruguay ( 07/08 ) . state.gov ( 2 april 2012 ) . cia – the world factbook – uruguay . cia.gov . uruguay 's population is heavily populated by people of european origin , mainly spaniards , followed closely by italians , uruguay – population . countrystudies.us . including numbers of french , greek , lebanese , armenians , swiss , scandinavians , germans , irish , dutch , belgians , austrians , and other southern and eastern europeans which migrated to uruguay in the late 19th century and 20th century . according to the 2006 national survey of homes by the uruguayan national institute of statistics : 94.6 % self-identified as having a white background , 9.1 % chose black ancestry , and 4.5 % chose an amerindian ancestry ( people surveyed were allowed to choose more than one option ) . . venezuela . according to the 2011 national population and housing census , 43.6 % of the venezuelan population ( approx . 13.1 million people ) identify as white . ine.gob.ve venezuelan population by 30/jun/2014 is 30,206,2307 according to the national institute of statistics genetic research by the university of brasilia shows an average admixture of 60.6 % european , 23.0 % amerindian and 16.3 % african ancestry in venezuelan populations . the majority of white venezuelans are of spanish , italian , portuguese and german descent . nearly half a million european immigrants , mostly from spain ( as a consequence of the spanish civil war ) , italy and portugal , entered the country during and after world war ii , attracted by a prosperous , rapidly developing country where educated and skilled immigrants were welcomed . spaniards were introduced into venezuela during the colonial period . most of them were from andalusia , galicia , basque country and from the canary islands . until the last years of world war ii , a large part of the european immigrants to venezuela came from the canary islands , and its cultural impact was significant , influencing the development of castilian in the country , its gastronomy and customs . with the beginning of oil operations during the first decades of the 20th century , citizens and companies from the united states , united kingdom and netherlands established themselves in venezuela . later , in the middle of the century , there was a new wave of originating immigrants from spain ( mainly from galicia , andalucia and the basque country ) , italy ( mainly from southern italy and venice ) and portugal ( from madeira ) and new immigrants from germany , france , england , croatia , netherlands , the middle east and other european countries , among others , animated simultaneously by the program of immigration and colonization implanted by the government . . zambia . . zimbabwe . . see also . caucasoid criollo people ethnic groups in europe ethnic groups in west asia european diaspora europhobia genetic history of europe white supremacy . references . notes bibliography allen , theodore , the invention of the white race , 2 vols . verso , london 1994 . baum , bruce david , the rise and fall of the caucasian race : a political history of racial identity . nyu press , new york and london 2006 , . brodkin , karen , how jews became white folks and what that says about race in america , rutgers , 1999 , . foley , neil , the white scourge : mexicans , blacks , and poor whites in texas cotton culture ( berkeley : university of california press , 1997 ) gossett , thomas f . , race : the history of an idea in america , new ed . ( new york : oxford university , 1997 ) guglielmo , thomas a . , white on arrival : italians , race , color , and power in chicago , 1890–1945 , 2003 , hannaford , ivan , race : the history of an idea in the west ( baltimore : johns hopkins university , 1996 ) ignatiev , noel , how the irish became white , routledge , 1996 , . jackson , f . l . c . ( 2004 ) . book chapter : british medical bulletin 2004 ; 69 : 215–35 . retrieved 29 december 2006 . jacobson , matthew frye , whiteness of a different color : european immigrants and the alchemy of race , harvard , 1999 , . oppenheimer , stephen ( 2006 ) . the origins of the british : a genetic detective story . constable and robinson ltd . , london . smedley , audrey , race in north america : origin and evolution of a worldview , 2nd ed . ( boulder : westview , 1999 ) . tang , hua . , tom quertermous , beatriz rodriguez , sharon l . r . kardia , xiaofeng zhu , andrew brown , james s . pankow , michael a . province , steven c . hunt , eric boerwinkle , nicholas j . schork , and neil j . risch ( 2005 ) genetic structure , self-identified race/ethnicity , and confounding in case-control association studies am . j . hum . genet . 76:268–75 . . external links .

white is a racial classification and skin color specifier , generally used for people of european origin ; although the definition can vary depending on context , nationality , and point of view . this term has at times been expanded to encompass persons of south asian , west asian , and north african descent , persons who are often considered '' non-white '' in other contexts in the united states . it has also been alleged that , in the united states , people of southern european and even irish descent have been excluded from this category , although this idea has been contested . the new york times ( 12 october 2019 ) : '' how italians became 'white ' '' . retrieved 9 july 2020 the usage of '' white people '' or a '' white race '' for a large group of mainly or exclusively european populations , defined by their light skin , among other physical characteristics , and contrasting with '' black '' , '' red '' , '' brown '' , '' yellow '' , and other '' colored '' people or '' person of color '' , originated in the 17th century . prior to this , europeans also described people from east asia as being '' white '' . it was only during the 19th century that this vague category was transformed in a scientific racism of race and skin color relations . the concept of a unified white race did not achieve universal acceptance in europe when it first came into use in the 17th century , or in the centuries afterward . nazi germany regarded some european peoples such as slavs as racially distinct from themselves . prior to the modern age , no european peoples regarded themselves as '' white '' , but rather defined their race , ancestry , or ethnicity in terms of their nationality . moreover , there is no accepted standard for determining the geographic barrier between white and non-white people . contemporary anthropologists and other scientists , while recognizing the reality of biological variation between different human populations , regard the concept of a unified , distinguishable '' white race '' as socially constructed . as a group with several different potential boundaries , it is an example of a fuzzy concept . the whiteness studies has particular resonance in the anglosphere : e.g . , in the united states ( white americans ) , canada ( white canadians ) , australia ( white australians ) , new zealand ( white new zealanders ) , the united kingdom ( white british ) , and south africa ( white south africans ) . in much of the rest of europe , the distinction between race and nationality is more blurred ; when people are asked to describe their race or ancestry , they often describe it in terms of their nationality . various social constructions of whiteness have been significant to national identity , public policy , religion , census , racial segregation , affirmative action , white privilege , eugenics , racial marginalization , and racial quotas . the term '' white race '' or '' white people '' entered the major european languages in the later 17th century , in the context of racialized slavery and unequal social status in the european colonies . description of populations as '' white '' in reference to their skin color predates this notion and is occasionally found in greco-roman ethnography and other ancient or medieval sources , but these societies did not have any notion of a white , pan-european race . scholarship on race distinguishes the modern concept from pre-modern descriptions , which focused on physical complexion rather than race . '' on both sides of the chronological divide between the modern and the pre-modern ( wherever it may lie ) , there is today a remarkable consensus that the earlier vocabularies of difference are innocent of race . ''