Malacca Sultanate

islam and malay culture . the conversion of the first ruler of malacca , parameswara , to islam was unclear so far with no evidence as to whether he had actually converted . the 16th-century portuguese writer tomé pires explicitly mentioned that parameswara was succeeded by his son , megat iskandar shah , and that only the latter converted to islam at the age 72 . on the other hand , the malay annals noted that it was during the reign of the third ruler muhammad shah ( r . 1424–44 ) , that the ruling class and the subjects began accepting islam . while there are differing views on when the islamization of malacca actually took place , it is generally agreed that islam was firmly established during the reign of muzaffar shah ( r . 1445–59 ) . islamisation in the region surrounding malacca gradually intensified between the 15th and 16th centuries through study centres in upeh , the district on the north bank of the malacca river . islam spread from malacca to jambi , kampar , bengkalis , siak , aru and the karimun islands in sumatra , throughout much of the malay peninsula , java and even philippines . the malay annals even reveals that the courts of malacca and pasai posed theological questions and problems to one another . of the so-called wali sanga ( 'nine saints ' ) responsible in spreading islam on java , at least two , sunan bonang and sunan kalijaga , are said to have studied in malacca . the portuguese apothecary and chronicler at the time of malacca 's fall , tome pires , in his suma oriental mentions that the rulers of kampar and indragiri on the east coast of sumatra converted to islam as a result of sultan muzaffar shah 's influence and went on to study the religion in malacca . the malay annals also mentions a number of scholars who served at the malacca royal court as teachers and counselors to the various sultans . maulana abu bakar served in the court of sultan mansur shah and introduced the kitab darul manzum , a theological text translated from the work of an arab scholar in mecca . a scholar by the name of maulana kadi sardar johan served as a religious teacher to both sultan mahmud shah and his son . in addition to kitab darul manzum , the malay annals also mentions the kitab al-luma ' fi tasawwuf ( 'book of flashes ' ) , a 10th-century treatise on sufism by abu nasr al-sarraj . certain elaborate ceremonies that blend islamic traditions with local culture were also began taking shape during malaccan era . one of the example was recorded during the reign of muhammad shah . a special ceremony was held that marked the celebration of the 27th night of ramadan , the laylat al-qadr . it began with a daytime procession , led by the temenggung on elephant-back , conveying the sultan 's prayer mat to the mosque for tarawih performed after the mandatory night prayers . on the following day the sultan 's turban would be carried in procession to the mosque . similar ceremonies accompanied the grand celebrations of both hari raya aidilfitri and hari raya aidiladha . apparently malaccan malay society had become so infused with the islamic worldview that on the eve of the fall of malacca , warriors at the court requested copies of two islamic heroic epics , the hikayat amir hamzah and the hikayat muhammad hanafiah , to inspire them in battle the next day . these two epics , still read today , tell of heroes fighting in the defence of islam . the rise of malacca as a centre of islam had a number of crucial implications . firstly , islam transformed the notion of kingship so that the sultan was no longer viewed as divine , but as god 's caliph ( vice-gerent on earth ) . secondly , islam was an important factor in enabling malacca to foster good relations with other islamic polities , including the ottoman empire , thereby attracting muslim traders to malacca . thirdly , islam brought many great transformation into malaccan society and culture , and ultimately it became a definitive marker of a malay identity . this identity was in turn enriched further through the standards set by malacca in some important aspects of traditional malay culture , notably in literature , rumah melayu , malay cuisine , traditional dress , performing arts , martial arts , and royal court traditions . over time , this common malay cultural idiom came to characterise much of the maritime southeast asia through the malayisation . trade . malacca developed from a small settlement to a cosmopolitan entrepot within the span of a century . this rapid progression was attributable to several factors , key among which were its strategic location along one of the world 's most important shipping lanes , malacca straits and the increasing demand for commodities from both the east and the west . ships from the east bearing goods from china , ryukyu , java and maluku islands would sail in by the northeast monsoon from december to january , while ships leaving for ports along indian coastline , the red sea and east africa would sail with the southwest monsoon . there were other ports along the malacca straits such as kedah in the peninsula and jambi and palembang in sumatra , yet none of them came close to challenging malacca 's success as a centre of international trade . malacca had an edge over these ports because its rulers created an environment that was safe and conducive for business . chinese records of the mid-15th century stated that malacca flourished as a centre for trade on account of its effective security measures . it also had a well-equipped and well-managed port . among the facilities provided for merchants were warehouses , where they could safely house their goods as they awaited favourable trade winds , as well as elephants for transporting goods to the warehouses . malacca 's management of its ethnically diverse merchant population – it is said that 84 different languages were spoken in malacca during its heyday- is particularly telling . to administer the cosmopolitan marketplace , the traders were grouped according to region and placed under one of four shahbandars . malacca had few domestic products with which to trade . it produced small amounts of tin and gold as well as dried fish , yet even the salt for preserving the fish had to be sourced from elsewhere in the region . basic goods , including vegetables , cattle and fish , were supplied by malacca 's trading partners . rice , mainly for local consumption , was imported . much of the mercantile activity in malacca , therefore , relied on the flow of goods from other parts of the region . among malacca 's most crucial functions was its role as both a collection centre for cloves , nutmeg and mace from the spice islands and a redistribution centre for cotton textiles from ports in gujarat , the coromandel coast , malabar coast and bengal . other goods traded in malacca included porcelain , silk and iron from china and natural products of the malay archipelago , such as camphor , sandalwood , spices , fish , fish roe and seaweed . from the coastal regions on both sides of malacca straits came forest products ; rattan , resin , roots and wax , and some gold and tin . these goods were then shipped to ports west of malacca especially gujarat . tin ingots were a trading currency unique to malacca . cast in the shape of a peck , each block weighs just over one pound . ten blocks made up one unit called a 'small bundle ' , and 40 blocks made up one 'large bundle ' . gold and silver coins were also issued by malacca as trading currency within the kingdom . legacy . malacca sultanate heralded the golden age of malay world and became an important port in the far east during the 16th century . it became so rich that the portuguese writer and trader tome pires said '' whoever is lord of malacca shall have his hands on the throat of venice . '' . within a span of a century , the malay empire left a lasting and important legacy , especially within malay culture and the history of malaysia . malacca was the first malay muslim state that achieved the status of a regional maritime power . despite the existence of earlier muslim kingdoms such as kedah , samudra pasai and aru , which also possessed well-established ports , none of them came close in challenging malacca 's success in expanding its territory and influence in the region . malacca also contributed in the evolution of a common malay culture based on islam by incorporating native and hindu-buddhist ideas and layered them extensively with islamic ideas and values . through its traditions , laws , and royal rituals and customs , the malaccan court set the example for later muslim sultanates in the region to follow . next to its role on promoting islamic faith , malacca is important especially for the modern nation of malaysia as it was the first centralised polity that consolidated the entire malay peninsula-now an important part of malaysia- under its rule . this is contrary with the achievements of older kingdoms of the malay peninsula such as kedah and langkasuka that only exerted their influence over a significant northern portion of the peninsula . because of these roles , malacca is considered by many to be the spiritual birthplace of malaysia . malaysia.com after the sultanate of malacca empire fell to portugal in 1511 , sultan mahmud syah i retreated to kampar , sumatra , he left behind two princes named sultan alauddin riayat shah ii and sultan muzaffar shah . the two princes went on to establish the sultanate of perak and sultanate of johor . malacca sultanate also emerged as the primary base in continuing the historic struggles of its predecessors , singapura and srivijaya , against their java-based nemeses . by the mid 15th century , majapahit found itself unable to control the rising power of malacca that began to gain effective control of malacca straits and expands its influence to sumatra . as a major entrepot , malacca attracted muslim traders from various part of the world and became a centre of islam , disseminating the religion throughout the maritime southeast asia . the expansion of islam into the interiors of java in the 15th century led to the gradual decline of majapahit , before it finally succumbed to the emerging local muslim forces in the early 16th century . at the same time , the literary tradition of malacca developed the classical malay that eventually became the lingua franca of the region . the advent of islam coupled with flourishing trade that used malay as medium of communication , culminated the domination of malacca and other succeeding malay-muslim sultanates in the maritime southeast asia . as noted by certain scholars , the historic malay-javanese rivalry in the region , persists until modern times , and continues to shape the diplomatic relations between the malay-centric malaysia and the java-based indonesia . . see also . list of sunni muslim dynasties sultanate of riau-lingga sultanate of johor sultanate of kedah bruneian empire sultanate of singgora . references . further reading . description of the starry raft ( 1436 ) xin cha shen lan 星槎勝覽

malacca had a well-defined government with a set of laws . on top of the sultanate 's hierarchy sat the sultan and he was an absolute monarch . the earlier srivijayan concept of kingship that the king 's authority to rule was based on legitimate lineage still prevailed , and with the coming of islam , it was reintroduced with the name daulat ( sovereignty ) . malacca 's legal codes identified four main state officials appointed by the sultan . below the sultan was a bendahara , a position similar to that of a vizier , who acted as an advisor to the sultan . it was the highest-ranking office that could be held by any common people in malacca . bendahara was also responsible for ensuring cordial relations with foreign states . malacca 's fifth bendahara , tun perak , excelled in both war and diplomacy . twice during the reign of sultan muzaffar shah , tun perak successfully led malaccan armed forces in repelling siamese attacks on malacca . when sultan mansur shah ascended the throne , acting on tun perak 's advice , he agreed to dispatch a peace envoy to siam . tun perak also advised the sultan to marry the daughter of the king of majapahit , malacca 's traditional enemy . next to bendahara was a state treasurer , called penghulu bendahari . later comes the temenggung which more or less a chief of public police and state security . after temenggung , a laksamanas authority is paramount . he was the head of the navy and also chief emissary of the sultan . he ensured that the malacca straits was safe and enforced the undang-undang laut melaka ( 'maritime laws of malacca ' ) . malacca 's most prominent laksamana was the legendary hang tuah . at the bottom of this nobility structure is the four shahbandars ( 'harbour masters ' ) for the different communities in the port – one focused exclusively on handling the affairs of the gujarati traders ; another was responsible for traders from southern india , bengal , burma and pasai ; a third for traders from maritime southeast asia ; and fourth for traders from annam , china and the ryukyu islands . as the gujaratis were the most dominant , numbering up to 1000 traders , their shahbandar was regarded as the most important of the four . lesser titled state officials were also appointed . they were known as the orang besar . in addition , a governor called the mandulika oversaw the administration of appanages and territories annexed by conquest . the sultanate was governed with several set of laws . the formal legal text of traditional malacca consisted of the undang-undang melaka ( laws of malacca ) , variously called the hukum kanun melaka and risalat hukum kanun , and the undang-undang laut melaka ( the maritime laws of malacca ' ) . the laws as written in the legal digests went through an evolutionary process . the legal rules that eventually evolved were shaped by three main influences , namely the early non-indigenous hindu/buddhist tradition , islam and the indigenous '' adat '' .