Radio-frequency identification

history . image : fastrak transponder.jpg right frame fastrak , an rfid tag used for electronic toll collection in california in 1945 , léon theremin invented a listening device for the soviet union which retransmitted incident radio waves with the added audio information . sound waves vibrated a diaphragm which slightly altered the shape of the resonator , which modulated the reflected radio frequency . even though this device was a covert listening device , rather than an identification tag , it is considered to be a predecessor of rfid because it was passive , being energized and activated by waves from an outside source . similar technology , such as the identification friend or foe transponder , was routinely used by the allies and germany in world war ii to identify aircraft as friendly or hostile . transponders are still used by most powered aircraft . an early work exploring rfid is the landmark 1948 paper by harry stockman , who predicted that '' considerable research and development work has to be done before the remaining basic problems in reflected-power communication are solved , and before the field of useful applications is explored . '' mario cardullo 's device , patented on january 23 , 1973 , was the first true ancestor of modern rfid , as it was a passive radio transponder with memory . the initial device was passive , powered by the interrogating signal , and was demonstrated in 1971 to the new york port authority and other potential users . it consisted of a transponder with 16 bit memory for use as a toll device . the basic cardullo patent covers the use of rf , sound and light as transmission carriers . the original business plan presented to investors in 1969 showed uses in transportation ( automotive vehicle identification , automatic toll system , electronic license plate , electronic manifest , vehicle routing , vehicle performance monitoring ) , banking ( electronic checkbook , electronic credit card ) , security ( personnel identification , automatic gates , surveillance ) and medical ( identification , patient history ) . in 1973 , an early demonstration of reflected power ( modulated backscatter ) rfid tags , both passive and semi-passive , was performed by steven depp , alfred koelle and robert frayman at the los alamos national laboratory . the portable system operated at 915 & nbsp ; mhz and used 12-bit tags . this technique is used by the majority of today 's uhfid and microwave rfid tags . in 1983 , the first patent to be associated with the abbreviation rfid was granted to charles walton . charles a . walton '' portable radio frequency emitting identifier '' issue date may 17 , 1983 . design . a radio-frequency identification system uses tags , or labels attached to the objects to be identified . two-way radio transmitter-receivers called interrogators or readers send a signal to the tag and read its response . . tags . rfid tags are made out of three pieces : a micro chip ( an integrated circuit which stores and processes information and modulates and demodulates radio-frequency ( rf ) signals ) , an antenna for receiving and transmitting the signal and a substrate . the tag information is stored in a non-volatile memory . the rfid tag includes either fixed or programmable logic for processing the transmission and sensor data , respectively . rfid tags can be either passive , active or battery-assisted passive . an active tag has an on-board battery and periodically transmits its id signal . a battery-assisted passive tag has a small battery on board and is activated when in the presence of an rfid reader . a passive tag is cheaper and smaller because it has no battery ; instead , the tag uses the radio energy transmitted by the reader . however , to operate a passive tag , it must be illuminated with a power level roughly a thousand times stronger than an active tag for signal transmission . this makes a difference in interference and in exposure to radiation . tags may either be read-only , having a factory-assigned serial number that is used as a key into a database , or may be read/write , where object-specific data can be written into the tag by the system user . field programmable tags may be write-once , read-multiple ; '' blank '' tags may be written with an electronic product code by the user . the rfid tag receives the message and then responds with its identification and other information . this may be only a unique tag serial number , or may be product-related information such as a stock number , lot or batch number , production date , or other specific information . since tags have individual serial numbers , the rfid system design can discriminate among several tags that might be within the range of the rfid reader and read them simultaneously . readers . rfid systems can be classified by the type of tag and reader . a passive reader active tag ( prat ) system has a passive reader which only receives radio signals from active tags ( battery operated , transmit only ) . the reception range of a prat system reader can be adjusted from , allowing flexibility in applications such as asset protection and supervision . an active reader passive tag ( arpt ) system has an active reader , which transmits interrogator signals and also receives authentication replies from passive tags . an active reader active tag ( arat ) system uses active tags activated with an interrogator signal from the active reader . a variation of this system could also use a battery-assisted passive ( bap ) tag which acts like a passive tag but has a small battery to power the tag 's return reporting signal . fixed readers are set up to create a specific interrogation zone which can be tightly controlled . this allows a highly defined reading area for when tags go in and out of the interrogation zone . mobile readers may be handheld or mounted on carts or vehicles . frequencies . some rfid tags implement a '' kill command '' mechanism to permanently and irreversibly disable them . this mechanism can be applied if the chip itself is trusted or the mechanism is known by the person that wants to '' kill '' the tag . uhf rfid tags that comply with the epc2 gen 2 class 1 standard usually support this mechanism , while protecting the chip from being killed with a password . guessing or cracking this needed 32-bit password for killing a tag would not be difficult for a determined attacker . . reliability . tag reliability . generally , an rfid tag has an inlay , composed of three components , namely silicon ( si ) chip , aca ( anisotropic conductive adhesive ) layer and flexible substrate ( al/pet ) , as shown in fig.1 ( a ) . the chip is flip-chip assembled on the al/pet flexible substrate through aca hot-press process . after the bonding process , the shear strength of the tag inlay can be measured using the bond tester . the shear strength test principle is based on the solder ball shear test standard , jedec standard jesd22-b117a . '' solder ball shear '' . jedec solid state technology association . 2006 . as shown in fig.1 ( b ) . a rigid clamping device is used to fix one side of the substrate , and the vacuum plate is used to absorb the bottom of the sample . the blade is pushed horizontally from one side . the maximum shear force for each joint , which finally separates the chip from the substrate , is recorded , as shown in fig.1 ( c ) . g . wu et al . '' study on the shear strength degradation of aca joints induced by different hygrothermal aging conditions '' . microelectronics reliability . 2013 . . see also . as5678 balise bin bug chipless rfid internet of things mass surveillance microchip implant ( human ) near field communication ( nfc ) positiveid privacy by design proximity card resonant inductive coupling rfdump rfid in schools rfid journal rfid on metal rsa blocker tag smart label speedpass tectile tracking system . references . external links . an open source rfid library used as door opener uhf regulations overview by gs1 what is rfid ? educational video by the rfid network privacy concerns and proposed privacy legislation what is rfid ? – animated explanation ieee council on rfid proximity cards

radio-frequency identification ( rfid ) uses electromagnetic fields to automatically identify and track tags attached to objects . an rfid system consists of a tiny radio transponder , a radio receiver and transmitter . when triggered by an electromagnetic interrogation pulse from a nearby rfid reader device , the tag transmits digital data , usually an identifying inventory number , back to the reader . this number can be used to track inventory goods . there are two types of rfid tags : passive tags are powered by energy from the rfid reader 's interrogating radio waves . active tags are powered by a battery and thus can be read at a greater range from the rfid reader , up to hundreds of meters . unlike a barcode , the tag does not need to be within the line of sight of the reader , so it may be embedded in the tracked object . rfid is one method of automatic identification and data capture ( aidc ) . automatic identification and data collection ( aidc ) rfid tags are used in many industries . for example , an rfid tag attached to an automobile during production can be used to track its progress through the assembly line , rfid-tagged pharmaceuticals can be tracked through warehouses , and microchip implant ( animal ) in livestock and pets enables positive identification of animals . since rfid tags can be attached to physical money , clothing , and possessions , or implanted in animals and people , the possibility of reading personally-linked information without consent has raised serious privacy concerns . these concerns resulted in standard specifications development addressing privacy and security issues . iso/iec 18000 and iso/iec 29167 use on-chip cryptography methods for untraceability , tag and reader authentication , and over-the-air privacy . iso/iec 20248 specifies a digital signature data structure for rfid and barcodes providing data , source and read method authenticity . this work is done within iso/iec jtc 1/sc 31 automatic identification and data capture techniques . tags can also be used in shops to expedite checkout , and to prevent theft by customers and employees . in 2014 , the world rfid market was worth us 8.89 billion , up from us 7.77 billion in 2013 and us 6.96 billion in 2012 . this figure includes tags , readers , and software/services for rfid cards , labels , fobs , and all other form factors . the market value is expected to rise from us 12.08 billion in 2020 to us 16.23 billion by 2029 .