John Hartford

newgrass . hartford recorded four more albums for rca from 1968 to 1970 : the love album , housing project , john hartford , and iron mountain depot . in 1971 , he moved to warner bros . records , where he was given more freedom to record in his untraditional style , fronting a band that included vassar clements , tut taylor , and norman blake . he recorded several albums that set the tone of his later career , including aereo-plain and morning bugle . sam bush said , '' without aereo-plain ( and the aereo-plain band ) , there would be no newgrass music . '' he switched to the flying fish label several years later , and continued to experiment with nontraditional country and bluegrass styles . among his recordings were two albums in 1977 and 1980 with doug and rodney dillard from the dillards , with sam bush as a backing musician and featuring a diversity of songs that included '' boogie on reggae woman '' and '' yakety yak '' . dillard/hartford/dillard : glitter grass/permanent wave , rounder records . hartford 's grammy-winning mark twang features hartford playing solo , reminiscent of his live solo performances playing the fiddle , guitar , banjo , and amplified plywood for tapping his feet . at the same time , he developed a stage show , which toured in various forms from the mid-1970s until shortly before his death . hartford changed recording labels several more times during his career ; in 1991 , he inaugurated his own small dog a'barkin ' label . later in the 1990s , he switched again to rounder records . he recorded a number of idiosyncratic records on rounder , many of which recalled earlier forms of folk and country music . among them was the 1999 album retrograss recorded with mike seeger and david grisman , with bluegrass versions of '' ( sittin ' on ) the dock of the bay '' , '' maybellene '' , '' when i 'm sixty-four '' , and '' maggie 's farm '' . he recorded several songs for the soundtrack to the movie o brother , where art thou , winning another grammy for his performance . he made his final tour in 2001 with the down from the mountain tour that grew out of that movie and its accompanying album . while performing in texas in april , he found that he could no longer control his hands due to non-hodgkin lymphoma , which ended his life two months later . hartford is considered a co-founder of the newgrass movement , although he remained deeply attached to traditional music , as well . his last band and last few albums reflect his love for pre-bluegrass old-time music . steamboating . the culture of the mississippi river and its steamboats captivated hartford from an early age . he said that it would have been his life 's work '' but music got in the way '' , so he intertwined them whenever possible . in the '70s , hartford earned his steamboat pilot 's license , which he used to keep close to the river he loved ; for many years , he worked as a pilot on the riverboat julia belle swain during the summers . he also worked as a towboat pilot on the mississippi , illinois , and tennessee rivers . during his later years , he came back to the river every summer . '' working as a pilot is a labor of love '' , he said . '' after a while , it becomes a metaphor for a whole lot of things , and i find for some mysterious reason that if i stay in touch with it , things seem to work out all right '' . his home in madison , tennessee , was situated on a bend of the cumberland river and built to simulate the view from a steamboat deck . he used to talk to the boat captains by radio as their barges crawled along the river . that bend of the cumberland river , known as '' hartford 's bend '' or '' john hartford point , '' dansby , andrew . june 5 , 2001 . john hartford dead after cancer battle . rolling stone . is denoted on official navigational charts with the '' john hartford light '' . us army corps of engineers . 2013 . cumberland river navigation charts : smithland , kentucky to celina , tennessee . chart no . 27 . an accomplished fiddler and banjo player , hartford was simultaneously an innovative voice on the country scene and a reminder of a vanished era . along with his own compositions , such as '' long hot summer days '' and '' kentucky pool '' , hartford was a repository of old river songs , calls , and stories . hartford was also the author of steamboat in a cornfield , a children 's book that recounts the true story of the ohio river steamboat the virginia and its beaching in a cornfield . final years and legacy . from the 1980s onwards , hartford had non-hodgkin lymphoma . he died of the disease at centennial medical center in nashville , on june 4 , 2001 , at age 63 . brandon ray kirk and he co-authored a biography of blind fiddler ed haley . hartford 's album the speed of the old longbow is a collection of haley 's tunes . writer and arts administrator art menius profiled hartford in the academia journal article , '' john hartford as i knew him , '' saying '' john connected not just words to music , but the old days of nashville to its present , tradition to innovation , new grass to bluegrass to old-time , television to radio , river to shore , aging musicians to hippies . goethe may have been the last person to know everything worth knowing , but john hartford tried . '' hartford also provided narration for the ken burns ' documentary series baseball and the civil war . hartford was given a star on the st . louis walk of fame in honor of his work . he also was given a posthumous president 's award by the americana music association in september 2005 . americana music awards page . retrieved october 2009 . the annual john hartford memorial festival is held at the bill monroe music park & campground near beanblossom , indiana . works . hartford recorded more than 30 albums , ranging across a broad spectrum of styles , from the traditional country of his early rca recordings , to the new and experimental sound of his early newgrass recordings , to the traditional folk style to which he often returned later in his life . hartford 's albums also vary widely in formality , from the stately and orderly annual waltz to the rougher and less cut recordings that typified many of his later albums . aereo-plain and morning bugle are often considered to be hartford 's most influential works , coming as they did at the beginning of a period in which artists such as hartford and the new grass revival , led by sam bush , would create a new form of country music , blending their country backgrounds with influences from a number of other sources . his later years had a number of live albums , as well as recordings that explored the repertoire of old-time folk music . he sketched the cover art for some of his midcareer albums , drawing with both hands simultaneously . in popular culture . his song '' this eve of parting '' , from the 1968 album the love album , was featured in the 2017 movie lady bird , portions being heard at two different points in the film . discography . references . external links . www.johnhartford.org – fan site

was born on december 30 , 1937 , in new york city to parents carl and mary harford . he spent his childhood in st . louis , missouri , where he was exposed to the influence that shaped much of his career and music : the mississippi river . from the time he got his first job on the river , at age 16 , hartford was on , around , or singing about the river . his early musical influences came from the broadcasts of the grand ole opry , and included earl scruggs , nominal inventor of the three-finger bluegrass style of banjo playing . hartford said often that the first time he heard earl scruggs pick the banjo changed his life . by age 13 , hartford was an accomplished old-time fiddler and banjo player , and he soon learned to play guitar and mandolin as well . hartford formed his first bluegrass band while attending john burroughs school , a local private high school . after high school , he enrolled at washington university in st . louis , completed four years of a commercial arts program and dropped out to focus on music ; however , he did receive a degree in 1960 . he immersed himself in the local music scene , working as a dj , playing in bands , and occasionally recording singles for local labels . in 1965 , he moved to nashville , tennessee , the center of the country music industry . in 1966 , he signed with rca victor and produced his first album , looks at life , in the same year . in 1967 , hartford 's second album earthwords & music spawned his first major songwriting hit , '' gentle on my mind '' . his recording of the song was only a modest success , but it caught the notice of glen campbell , who recorded his own version , which gave the song much wider publication . at the 1968 grammys , the song netted four awards , two of which went to hartford . it became one of the most widely recorded country songs of all time , and the royalties it brought in allowed hartford great financial independence ; hartford later said that the song bought his freedom . hartford 's biography from his official site . as his popularity grew , he moved to the west coast , where he became a regular on the smothers brothers comedy hour ; other television appearances followed , as did recording appearances with several major country artists . hartford played banjo and sang the vocal harmonies on the guthrie thomas song , '' i 'll be lucky '' . he also played with the byrds on their album sweetheart of the rodeo . his success on the smothers brothers series was enough that hartford was offered the lead role in a tv detective series but he turned it down to move back to nashville and concentrate on music . he also was a regular on the glen campbell goodtime hour ( the banjo picker who would stand up from his seat in the audience to begin the theme music ) and the johnny cash show . in live performances , john hartford was a true one-man band ; he used several stringed instruments and a variety of props such as plywood squares and boards with sand and gravel for flatfoot dancing .