Wet Wet Wet

commercial success : 1988–1996 . in 1988 , wet wet wet scored their first number 1 hit with a cover version of the beatles ' '' with a little help from my friends '' , recorded for the charity childline . another beatles song , '' she 's leaving home '' , was equally-billed on the flip side , performed by billy bragg . in the same year , an album - entitled the memphis sessions - was released from their spell in the united states prior to hitting the big time . it was produced and mixed by willie mitchell . it was recorded at his royal studios in memphis , tennessee . the following year the band released their third album , holding back the river , which was also a success and produced the hit single '' sweet surrender '' . the album was well-received , relying more on strings and other classical arrangements . at the end of 1989 , the band appeared on the band aid ii charity single . in 1992 , the band released a fourth studio album , entitled high on the happy side , which spawned the number 1 hit single '' goodnight girl '' - the only self-penned chart-topping single they have had to date . the song proved something of a saviour , as the previous two single releases from the album had failed in the singles charts , although the album sold well . in total , five singles were released from it . the following day saw the release of a special-edition album , cloak & dagger , released under the alias '' maggie pie & the impostors '' . '' maggie pie '' was marti pellow , and the '' impostors '' were ( on album cover , clockwise from top left ) neil mitchell , graeme duffin , tommy cunningham , and graeme clark . the band 's first greatest-hits package , end of part one , was released towards the end of 1993 . the eighteen-song selection included '' shed a tear '' and '' cold cold heart '' , which were recorded with nile rodgers in new york city especially for the album and released as singles . in 1994 , wet wet wet had their biggest hit , a cover version of the troggs ' single '' love is all around '' , which was used on the soundtrack to the film four weddings and a funeral . it was a huge international success and spent 15 weeks atop the british charts . the week before it could have equalled the record for the longest-standing number-one single , held by bryan adams ' '' ( everything i do ) i do it for you '' , pellow insisted on its deletion because he wanted to focus on getting their next album , picture this , finished . vh1 to one , 2001 however , even after its deletion , there were still enough copies in the shops to get the song to number 2 in its 16th week , finally knocked off the top spot by whigfield 's debut single '' saturday night '' . in any event , it remained in the top 40 for the remainder of the year . in the official uk best-selling singles list issued in 2002 ( the 50th anniversary of the chart ) , it was placed 12th . '' love is all around '' also featured on the 1995 album picture this , their sixth , which also spawned the hit single '' julia says '' and '' do n't want to forgive me now '' . the album , although well received by critics , would ultimately live in the shadow of '' love is all around '' . in 1995 , they became the shirt sponsors of their hometown football club , clydebank f.c . . subsequent releases and break-up activities : 1997–2003 . during the rest of the 1990s the band maintained a strong uk following , although success in the singles charts became more sporadic . their seventh studio album , 1997 's ten , celebrated the group 's decade at the top . after the tour in support of 10 , things turned sour over a dispute about royalty-sharing . revenue from the group 's songwriting had been a four-way equal split . cunningham turned up for a routine band meeting , only to discover that the other three members wanted to revise the policy , paying the drummer a lesser amount . cunningham instantly quit the group saying that the band had run its course and that the band was no longer a healthy place to be . in 1999 pellow also quit the band , to focus on getting himself healthy again after succumbing to a debilitating alcohol and drug addiction . pellow succeeded in kicking his habits , and returned to the public eye in 2001 with his debut solo album , smile . reformation : 2004–present . in march 2004 , the band cautiously reformed in order to work on an eighth album . a single entitled '' all i want '' was released in november 2004 from the band 's second greatest hits , released a week later . they undertook a successful tour of the uk the following month . in july 2005 , wet wet wet played at the summer weekender festival in england , and were one of the headline acts at live 8 edinburgh in scotland . on 31 december 2006 , wet wet wet were the headline act for aberdeen 's hogmanay celebrations when the celebrations in all other scottish cities was held off because of strong winds and heavy rain . they performed thirteen songs in an hour-long set . a single , '' too many people '' , was released on 5 november 2007 , and its parent album , timeless , on 12 november . these preceded a sold-out december tour , a taste of which was given at their newmarket concert in august . in preparation for the tour , the band also announced that they will be playing two intimate dates at zavvi stores in glasgow and london in november . '' weightless '' , the second single from the album , was released on 4 february and charted at number 10 , giving them their first top-ten hit in eleven years . in march 2012 , it was announced that the band would perform its first concert in over five years , at glasgow green on 20 july , to celebrate their 25th anniversary of the release of their debut album , popped in , souled out . in may 2013 , uk music promoter stuart galbraith of kilimanjaro live confirmed a ten date uk tour for wet wet wet commencing in december 2013 . wet wet wet uk tour dates kilimanjaro live on 8 october 2013 , wet wet wet announced via their twitter page that they would be releasing a new greatest hits album , step by step : the greatest hits , on 25 november 2013 . the album features three new tracks as well as songs from their back catalogue . on 28 july 2017 , it was announced that pellow had quit wet wet wet to focus on his solo career . on 25 september 2018 , the band announced that kevin simm ( formerly of liberty x ) was their new singer . simm started singing with the band at two shows : st lukes in calton , glasgow , and 229 the venue in london in november 2018 . following on from their sold-out shows , they announced a nationwide 18-date tour , starting in april 2019 . in november 2020 , the band announced the 2021 release of new album the journey , their first studio album since 2007 and the first including vocals from former the voice uk winner kevin simm , who also re-recorded the vocals on a number of their hits for the bonus cd ( which comes with the 2cd/dvd version of album ) . . discography . popped in souled out ( 1987 ) the memphis sessions ( 1988 ) holding back the river ( 1989 ) high on the happy side ( 1992 ) cloak & dagger ( 1992 ) picture this ( 1995 ) 10 ( 1997 ) timeless ( 2007 ) the journey ( 2021 )

clark and cunningham met on the school bus and became close friends . mutual friend neil mitchell , prompted by his pals ' positive attitude , promised to supply keyboards when he could scrape together enough money from his paper round . to complete the quartet , clark approached mark mclachlan , who at the time was training to be a painter and decorator . he said , '' at break we all went behind the kitchen for a fly smoke , and there in the corner was this quiet kid who said very little , but when he sang , everyone listened . '' end of part one : their greatest hits liner notes it was sometime in 1983 that graeme duffin joined wet wet wet , after the departure of co-founder lindsey mccauley . duffin had previously been in a glasgow-based band called new celeste and recorded two albums with them high sands and the liquid lake ( 1977 ) in holland ( with sleeve notes by billy connolly ) on the universe label and on the line ( 1979 ) in berlin on the hansa records label . the band combined folk , rock and jazz players . with the line-up complete , rehearsals took place in mrs . clark 's kitchen . they rehearsed for about two years , working on song producing and writing skills . they eventually made their live debut at glasgow 's nightmoves venue . at this gig they met elliot davis , who would become the band 's manager . the band name wet wet wet was chosen from a line in the 1982 scritti politti song '' gettin ' havin ' & holdin ' '' ( '' it 's tired of joking . wet , wet with tears '' ) , and mclachlan changed his name to stage name '' marti pellow '' . their first professional gig was a new year 's eve show at glasgow 's barrowlands . behind the smile documentary , 2004 david bates signed the band to polygram in 1985 . one of the first demo songs they did was '' wishing i was lucky '' . when the band took the demo to bates in late 1986 , he discarded it as a poor effort . the band decided at this point that they could no longer work with him . six months later , the band and their new a & r manager , nick angel , released the single , and it reached number six in the uk singles chart . '' i was in a queue in a fish and chip shop in glasgow when it came on radio clyde , '' cunningham remembers . '' i felt like shouting to everybody , 'that 's me and my mates ! ' it was an incredible feeling i 've not forgotten . '' the parent album , popped in souled out , also became a hit and produced three more hit singles , namely '' sweet little mystery '' , '' temptation '' , and '' angel eyes '' . they supported lionel richie on his uk tour .