'' in charles swenson 's animated film down and dirty duck ( 1974 ) , a stereotypical mexican mouse character , wearing a sombrero and a bandolier ( probably in a parody of speedy gonzales ) , speaks the line as '' i do n't want your stinkin ' badges ! '' in the film the ninth configuration ( 1980 ) , when the asylum patients are quoting lines from movies , one quotes '' badges ? we do n't need no stinking badges '' in the sketch-comedy film elephant parts ( 1981 ) , one of the fake ad sequences portrays '' an authentic mexican bandito in a mexican-american restaurant , '' whose sole line is '' nachos ? we do n't need no stinkin ' nachos ! '' in john sayles 's sci-fi comedy the brother from another planet ( 1984 ) , two men in black are hunting for the protagonist in a harlem bar , where the following exchange takes place '' in the '' weird al '' yankovic film uhf ( 1989 ) , when animal show host raul ( trinidad silva ) is asked to take a consignment of badgers , he says '' badgers ? badgers ? ! we do n't need no stinking badgers ! '' in the film flashback ( 1990 ) , as the hooker is undressing the fbi agent , she discards his badge saying '' we do n't need no stinkin ' badges '' in the ron howard film backdraft ( 1991 ) , william baldwin 's character tries to refresh his nephew 's memory by using a hand puppet to exclaim , '' spinach ? we do n't need no stinkin ' spinach ! '' in the film no code of conduct ( 1998 ) paul gleason 's character says in a bad mexican accent '' badges ? we do n't need no stinkin ' badges ! '' , then goes on to sheepishly mention that he was quoting from the 1974 film blazing saddles the trading card game magic : the gathering ( 1993 ) makes reference to a card that was to be included in the joke unhinged set called , '' we do n't need no stinkin ' merfolk ! '' the game ftl : faster than light ( 2012 ) includes an achievement called , '' i do n't need no stinkin ' upgrades ! '' the game ground zero texas ( 1993 ) has a dialog from actor danny trejo saying : '' badges , we do n't need no stinking badges '' in the adventure game escape from monkey island ( 2000 ) , the main protagonist guybrush threepwood is given a dialogue option , when asked for id by the bartender , '' id ? i do n't need no stinkin ' id ! '' in the first-person shooter duke nukem forever ( 2011 ) , the main protagonist says '' keycard ? i do n't need no fucking keycards ! '' when he faces a door which requires a keycard to be opened the 2 skinnee j 's song '' the good , the bad , and the skinnee '' ( 1998 ) from the album supermercado ! features the line '' badges , we do n't need no stinking badges '' sung as a refrain five times in a row in the season 4 episode 10 , titled '' there goes the neighborhood '' , of the the a-team , when shown the town watch fake badges murdock says '' badges ? we do n't need no stinkin ' badges '' in the episode '' it 's a nice place to visit '' ( 33 , 1967 ) of the monkees , micky dolenz misquoted the line as '' badges ? we do n't need no stinking badges '' in the episode '' filthy pictures '' ( 1980 ) of wkrp in cincinnati , johnny fever is telling a story '' i said show me some badges , and the guys says , badges ! uh , we do n't need no stinking badges '' in a 1983 episode of wizards and warriors , the character marko ( played by walter olkewicz ) delivers a spoof of the line as '' badgers ? we do n't need no stinkin ' badgers '' finds a junior park ranger 's badge , about which michael states , '' badges ? we do n't need no stinking badges ! '' in the friends season 8 episode '' the one with the baby shower '' ( 2002 ) , the quote is mentioned as one of joey 's training questions for the show bamboozled in the '' ghost in the machine , '' episode 82 , season 3 ( 1986 ) of the transformers , the ghost of starscream accosts decepticon guards runabout and runamuck by saying , '' passes ? passes ? i do n't have to show you no stinking passes ! '' in the tv movie good luck charlie , it 's christmas ! , when asked to see some identification badges , the leader of a group of live action video game players responded with '' badges ? we do n't need no stinkin ' badges ! '' in the episode '' musta been a beautiful baby '' ( episode 28 , october 13 , 1993 ) of adventures of sonic the hedgehog , scratch and grounder masquerade as police officers from the '' department of lost kids '' , and when asked for their badges , reply '' badges ? we do n't need no stinking— '' before being cut off and thrown out in the episode '' gumby with a pokey '' ( season 7 , episode 21 , may 17 , 2010 ) of two and a half men , berta and charlie are quoting movies while high , and berta says the line '' badges ? we do n't need no stinkin ' badges ! '' using a popsicle as a mustache in the episode '' blood drive '' ( season 5 , episode 18 , march 5 , 2009 ) of the office , michael is talking at a valentine 's day singles party and says '' relationships ? we don ’ t need no stinkin ’ relationships ! '' 